This section reproduces the full text of each Event card and notes
its Faction Order (2.3.2; Ae=Aedui, Ar=Arverni, Be=Belgae,
Ro=Romans) followed by, if applicable, Non-Player Instruction symbols (8.2.1;
C=Carnyx, L=Laurels, S=Swords). The listings add tips on
how to implement the Event.

1. Cicero Ro L Ar L Ae S Be L
Defender of the Republic returns to politics: Shift the Senate 1
box in either direction (or flip to Firm if already at top or bottom).
Tips. The Senate would shift regardless of any Fallen Legions. If
the Senate is already Firm, the Event would flip the marker in place,
back to its normal side (6.5.1).

2. Legiones Xiiii et XV Ro L Ar C Ae L Be L
Personal army: Romans may shift Senate 1 box up (toward Up-
roar) to place 2 Legions total from Legions track and/or Fallen into
Provincia.
Green legionaries: Free Battle against Romans in a Region. The
first Loss removes a Legion automatically, if any there.
Tips. Unshaded Legions here can come from Fallen not just the
track (1.4.1). Shift to place the Legions must move the marker one
box up or instead flip it (5.1.1, 6.5.1), so could not occur if already
at Firm Uproar.

3. Pompey Ro Ar C Ae L Be L
Consul supports Gaul campaign: If Adulation, place 1 Legion in
Provincia. If not, shift the Senate 1 box down (toward Adulation).
Rival requests legions for the East: If the Legions track has 4 or
fewer Legions, Romans remove 2 Legions to the Legions track.

4. Circumvallation Ro Ar S Be S Ae L
Counter-fort: Romans may free March to an adjacent Citadel and put
Circumvallation marker on Citadel Faction’s pieces there. Marked
group may not move from Region; if it attacks alone, Romans defend
as if Fort. Remove marker if group attacks Romans in Battle or is
eliminated, or if no Romans there.
Tips. Keep the pieces affected by the marker grouped underneath
it (or around the Citadel piece with the marker on that), separate
from any other group of pieces that might enter or be placed in the
Region. Roman origin Regions count as selected for March (flip
Auxilia Hidden).

5. Gallia Togata Ro Ar C Be L Ae L
Strategic rear: Place Gallia Togata marker and 3 Auxilia in Cis-
alpina. It is a Supply Line Region where only Romans may stack,
March out costs 0, and each Recruit places 2 Auxilia.
Cisalpines require garrison: Unless Senate in Adulation, Romans
remove 1 Legion to track and 2 Auxilia to Available.
Tips. The unshaded Event is one of the few that alter stacking (1.4.2,
5.1.1). Cisalpina is adjacent to the Ubii and Sequani Regions and to
Provincia Supply Lines are described in rule 3.2.1. Mark Control
(either Roman or No Control) and, in Quarters Phases, move into or
out of Cisalpina and pay Quarters costs there as for other Regions.
Shaded Legion removal is to track not Fallen (1.4.1).

6. Marcus Antonius Ro Ar L Be L Ae L
Cavalry commander: Romans may free Scout, then may free Battle
in 1 Region, Auxilia causing twice usual Losses.
To Rome as Quaestor: Move up to 4 on-map Auxilia to Provincia.
Romans Ineligible through next card. Executing Faction Eligible
Tips. Unshaded free Scout could move any Auxilia but could Reveal
enemy Warbands and mark them as Scouted only within one Region
of Caesar or with the Roman Successor (4.2.2, 5.1.1, 5.4). A Gallic
Faction executing the Shaded Event, not the Romans, would get to
choose which Auxilia move.

7. Alaudae Ro Ae L Ar C Be L
Legion formed in Gaul: Romans place 1 Legion and 1 Auxilia in
a Roman Controlled Region.
Locally raised Legion unreliable: If the Legions track has 7 or fewer
Legions, remove 1 Legion to the track and 1 Auxilia to Available
Tips. Unshaded Legion could not be placed from Fallen (1.4.1).
Shaded Legions track does not include Fallen Legions (1.4.1).

8. Baggage Trains Ro Ae L Ar Be
Well-stocked: Take this card and place it at your Forces display.
Your March costs 0 Resources.
CAPABILITY
Slow wagons: Take this card. Your Raids may use 3 Warbands per
Region and steal Resources despite Citadels or Forts.
Tip. Shaded Raids may flip up to three Warbands from Hidden to
Revealed instead of just two taking one Resource each (3.3.3).

9. Mons Cevenna Ro Ae Ar Be
Army crosses mountain thought impassable: Free March from a
Region into an adjacent Region, both within 1 Region of Provincia.
Then execute a free Command and any free Special Ability (in any
order) in (or from) the destination Region.
Tips. “Within 1 Region of Provincia” means in Provincia, Sequani,
or Arverni Regions. March origin Region counts as selected for
March (flip Hidden there). The free Command could include March
out of the destination Region.

10. Ballistae Ro Ae L Be S Ar S
Siege machines: Besiege cancels Citadel’s halving of Losses. Battle
rolls remove Forts on 1-2 not 1-3.
CAPABILITY
Siege stratagems: Place near a Gallic Faction. That Faction after
Ambush may remove defending Fort or Citadel.
Tips. Unshaded Capability both makes Roman Besiege more potent
and Roman Forts more defensible. Shaded Capability in effect adds
a modified Besiege Special Ability to the receiving Gallic Faction’s
Ambushes.

11. Numidians Ro L Ae L Be L Ar L
Potent flankers: Romans place 3 Auxilia in a Region within 1 of
their Leader and free Battle there, with Auxilia causing double
Losses (before rounding).
Africans called away: Remove any 4 Auxilia.
Tips. For unshaded Losses, count up total Losses from all Auxilia
including any halving such as from an enemy Citadel, then round that total. This would include the extra initial Losses caused by
unshaded Balearic Slingers.

12. Titus Labienus Ro Ae L Be L Ar
Able lieutenant: Roman Special Abilities may select Regions re-
gardless of where the Roman leader is located.
CAPABILITY
Opponents suborn Caesar’s 2nd: Build and Scout Reveal are
maximum 1 Region.
Tips. Shaded Build or Scout Reveal and marking of enemy Warbands
as Scouted would still require the Roman leader in the space or
Caesar adjacent; Scout could still move Auxilia from any Regions
across the map except Britannia (4.2.2).

13. Balearic Slingers Ro Be L Ar C Ae L
Sharp skirmishers: Romans choose 1 Region per enemy Battle
Command. Auxilia there first inflict ½ Loss each on attacker. Then
resolve Battle.
CAPABILITY
Reliance on foreign contingents: Recruit only where Supply Line,
paying 2 Resources per Region.
Tips. For the unshaded Capability, any Ambush is a Battle Command
(3.3.4, 5.4). Romans could have Auxilia cause Losses to an attacker
Battling another Faction in the Region. If Romans have unshaded
Balearic Slingers and unshaded Germanic Horse, Auxilia inflict
one Loss each not ½ before enemy Battle.

14. Clodius Pulcher Ro Be Ar C Ae L
Popularist Senate leader: Shift the Senate 1 box down (toward
Adulation, or flip to Firm if there).
Caesar stalwart murdered: Roman Leader (if on map) to Provincia.
Romans Ineligible through next card. Executing Faction Eligible.
Tip. Place the cylinder of the Faction executing the shaded Event at
the left edge of the appropriate “Event” box on the Sequence track
as a reminder that it will stay Eligible.

15. Legio X Ro Be L Ar C Ae L
Reliable elite: In Battles that have Roman Leader and Legion, final
Losses against Romans -1 and final Losses that Romans inflict +2.
CAPABILITY
Playing favorites: Caesar attacking in Battle doubles Loss inflicted
by 1 Legion only (not by all Legions).
Tip. For unshaded Capability, first fully calculate the Loss total,
then subtract or add.

16. Ambacti Ro Be L Ae L Ar L
Gallic retinues in Roman service: Place 4 Auxilia in a Region with
Romans or 6 with Caesar.
Gallic vassals head home: Roll a die and remove either 3 or that
number of Auxilia from anywhere.
Tip. Unshaded “Romans” means any Roman Forces piece.

17. Germanic Chieftains Ro L Be S Ae S Ar
Fate of Ariovistus remembered: Romans March up to 3 German
groups, then Ambush with Germans in any 1 Region.
Fate of Ariovistus forgotten: Conduct an immediate Germans Phase
as if Winter.
Tips. Unshaded action with German pieces would be guided by the
Romans, not by the Germans Phase sequence (6.2); shaded would
follow the full 6.2 procedure.

18. Rhenus Bridge Ro Be Ae Ar
Punitive expedition: Romans may remove all Germans from 1
Germania Region under or adjacent to Roman Control.
Bogged down: If a Legion is within 1 Region of Germania, Romans
-6 Resources and Ineligible through next card.
Tips. Unshaded “all Germans” means all Germanic pieces: Allies
and Warbands. Shaded “within 1 Region” means either in or adjacent
to a Germania Region.

19. Lucterius Ar C Ro L Ae L Be
Thrust at Narbo checked: Either remove up to 6 Arverni Warbands
within 1 Region of Provincia, or place up to 5 Auxilia in Provincia.
Daring Cadurcan: If Arverni Successor on map or Available,
Arverni place him anywhere, symbol up, as if Vercingetorix.
Tips. Unshaded Event if removing Warbands would remove up to six
total from among Provincia, Sequani, Aedui, and Arverni Regions.
Shaded Event is the only way that the Arverni can recover their
named Leader piece after removal—representing Lucterius taking
charge of the Great Revolt.

20. Optimates Ar L Ro S Ae S Be S
Civil war looms: Keep this card by the Winter track. Upon the
game’s 2nd and each later Victory Phase, if Roman victory exceeds
12, first remove all Legions to the Legions track, then end the game
and determine victory.
Tips. “Roman victory exceeds 12” means that the red
Subdued+Dispersed+Allies marker is at 13 or above (1.9, 7.2).
The upshot of this Event is under certain circumstances to end the
game early and remove from the Arverni the burden of one of their
victory conditions. As long as Caesar is doing well enough in Gaul
(to remain a political threat in Rome) but the Gallic revolts continue,
he will have to withdraw his legions to fight a Roman civil war with-
out Vercingetorix having to throw them out. The Arverni will still
have to achieve their other measure of success, maintaining nine or
more Allies and Citadels. Flip the Winter track marker as an added
reminder of the effect on later Victory Phase checks.

21. The Province Ar C Ro L Ae L Be S
Funnel from the Empire: If only Roman pieces in Provincia, either
place 5 Auxilia there, or add +10 Roman Resources.
Cavalry probes: If Arverni Control Provincia, shift Senate 2 boxes
up (toward Uproar). If not, Arverni place 4 Warbands there and free
Raid or Battle there as if no Fort.
Tips. Shaded Warbands must be Arverni (5.1). As if no Fort means
that defending Romans would not halve Losses for the presence of a
Fort alone, nor could the Fort absorb any Losses upon Retreat (3.3.4).

22. Hostages Ar Ro Be L Ae
Incentive: Among Regions that you Control, remove or replace a
total of up to 4 Warbands or Auxilia with your own.
Casus belli: Place a Gallic Ally and any 1 Warband at each of 1 or
2 Subdued Tribes where Roman pieces.
Tips. Shaded Allies need not be those of the executing Faction.

23. Sacking Ar C Ro Be Ae S
Revenge: Romans may place Razed marker on a City at Roman
Control (replace anything) for +8 Resources. It permanently Dis-
perses the City.
Costly, drawn-out siege: If a Legion where your Citadel, remove
the Legion and Romans Ineligible through next card.
Tips. Unshaded marker is the equivalent of a Dispersed marker for
all purposes except it is not removed in Spring (1.4.2, 3.2.3, 6.6,
7.2). A few Events can remove it, however. Shaded Legion removal
is to Fallen (1.4.1). Mark shaded Ineligibility by placing the Roman
cylinder under the executing Faction’s cylinder.

24. Sappers Ar C Ro L Be L Ae L
Key workers diverted to fortification: A Gallic Faction with a Citadel
loses 10 Resources.
Iron miners cause siege disaster: In a Region with an Arverni
Citadel, remove a total of 2 Legions and/or Auxilia.
Tips. Any Faction can execute either version of the Event, but the
shaded target Region must have an Arverni Citadel. Legion removal
would be to Fallen (1.4.1).

25. Aquitani Ar Ae L Ro L Be S
Invasion of Celtica: Free Battle in either Pictones or Arverni Region,
inflicting 3 extra Losses, 1 Ally (not Citadel) first.
Nitiobrigan horse: Your Rally in Pictones and Arverni Regions
places 2 extra Warbands each.
CAPABILITY
Tips. Unshaded Battle would be possible even without friendly
Forces in the Region, because Event text decrees Battle there (5.1.1)
and the three Losses would add to 0 Losses. Shaded Rally would
place two extra Warbands in each of the Regions even if 0 would
normally be placed, but Rally would have to be possible, so not in
Devastated unless Arverni with Vercingetorix (3.3.1).

26. Gobannitio Ar Ae Ro Be S
Vercingetorix’s wary uncle: Remove anything at Gergovia. Place
a Roman Ally or Aedui Ally or Citadel there (despite Arverni-only
stacking).
Nephew in charge: Arverni may remove and place Allies as desired
in Arverni Region, then free Rally within 1 Region of Vercingetorix.
Tips. The unshaded Event is one of a handful that alter stacking
(1.4.2, 5.1.1); the shaded Event does not, so Arverni would not be
able to place Allies at Dispersed, for example. “Within 1 Region of”
means in any Regions with or adjacent to Vercingetorix.

27. Massed Gallic Archers Ar C Ae Ro Be L
Reliance on light arms: Arverni Battle each Region inflicts 1 fewer
Defender Loss (before any halving).
“An enormous number”: At start of Battles with 6 or more Arverni
Warbands, the other side first must absorb 1 extra Loss.
Tips. Unshaded applies only to Arverni attack during Arverni Battle
Command, not Arverni defense during others’ Battle Commands.
Shaded applies to all Battles involving that number of Arverni at-
tacking or defending.

28. Oppida Ar Ae Be Ro S
Hillforts: Place any Available Gallic Allied Tribes desired at any
Subdued Cities not under Roman Control. Then replace any Gal-
lic Allies at any Cities desired with Available Citadels of the same
Faction.
Tips. The Event can place any Citadels available and desired at
Subdued (not Dispersed or Razed) Cities, and can replace Gallic
Allied Tribes already there with Citadels of the same Faction. The
Faction executing the Event could first remove its own pieces from
elsewhere to Available to enable such placement (1.4.1).

29. Suebi Mobilize Ar Ae S Be Ro S
Germanic pressure: Remove any Dispersed from both Suebi Place
a (black) Germanic Ally at each (that has none). Then conduct an
immediate Germans Phase as if Winter, but skip Rally.
Tips. The Event provides a rare opportunity for early removal of
Dispersed markers. After placing Allies (if both not already in place),
implement the sequence in 6.2 but without Germanic Rally (6.2.1).

30. Vercingetorix’s Elite Ar C Ae Be L Ro
Harsh punishments unpopular: Arverni Rally places Warbands up
to Allies+Citadels (not Leader+1).
CAPABILITY
Roman-style discipline: In any Battles with their Leader, Arverni
pick 2 Arverni Warbands—they take & inflict Losses as if Legions.
Tip. If the shaded two picked Warbands are defending, are chosen to
absorb Losses, and both roll a 1-3, the Counterattack would not inflict
Losses as if with any Legions. If removed, the picked Warbands go
to Arverni Available Forces as normal (1.4.1, not Fallen Legions).

31. Cotuatus & Conconnetodumnus Ar Be Ro Ae L
Chieftains’ atrocity angers Rome: Place 1 Legion in Provincia.
Slaughter of traders cows allies: Remove 3 Allies—1 Roman, 1
Aedui, and 1 Roman or Aedui (not Citadels).
Tip. Unshaded Legion must be placed from the Legions track, not
Fallen (1.4.1).

32. Forced Marches Ar L Be S Ro L Ae S
Double time: Relocate any of your Warbands or Legions and Auxilia
and/or Leader from any Regions other than Britannia to any Regions
except Britannia. Pieces moved go Hidden.
Tip. Relocating pieces could include any mobile forces of the
executing Faction only. The Regions do not need to be adjacent.
Scouted Warbands would remove their marker rather than flipping
Hidden (4.2.2).

33. Lost Eagle Ar C Be L Ro Ae
Recovered: Romans place 1 Fallen Legion into a Region that has a
non-Aedui Warband and a Legion already.
Stolen totem: Remove 1 Fallen Legion permanently from play. This
upcoming Senate Phase, no shift down (mark).
Tips. The Legion must come from the Fallen Legions box, not the
Legions track or the map. Shaded places Lost Eagle marker in either
Fallen Legions box or Senate Phase box as a reminder that no Senate
shift toward Adulation or flip to Firm. Adulation (6.5) is possible this
coming Winter (only). After this Senate Phase, remove the marker.

34. Acco Ar L Be L Ae Ro
Flogging stirs response: A Gaul or Roman free Rallies or Recruits
in any 3 Regions, as if with Control.
Chief organizes revolt: In Carnutes and Mandubii Regions, replace
all Allies with Arverni Allies and Citadels with Arverni Citadels.
Tip. The unshaded Rally may include Devastated Regions and may
place Allies even without Control.

35. Gallic Shouts Ar Be Ae L Ro S
Messages reveal plans: Romans may look at the next 2 facedown
cards and either execute a free Limited Command or be Eligible.
Rapid relay of messages: A Gallic Faction executes 1 Command
and 1 Limited Command, in either order, free, no Battles.
Tips. If another Faction executes the unshaded Event and no other
Faction executes Command and Special Ability, Romans could then
do so, even if they had been Ineligible (2.3.4). Unshaded Event
grants a free Command in several Regions, plus any other Limited
Command in one Region (3.1, 3.1.2, 2.3.5).

36. Morasses Ar Be L Ae L Ro
Hideout found: Free Battle against a Gallic Faction in 1 Region.
No Retreat, Counterattack, or Citadel effect on Losses. Attackers
Hidden.
Warrior armies hide in terrain: A Gallic Faction free Battles with
Ambush anywhere, then free Marches.
Tip. Shaded free Battles can add Ambush regardless of Hidden
pieces or location of Leaders (4.3.3, 5.1.1).

37. Boii Ae Ro Ar Be S
Word of Aedui client’s resistance: Aedui or Romans place 2 Allies
and 2 Warbands or Auxilia at or adjacent to Aedui Control.
Client left to self-defense: At or adjacent to Arverni Control, replace
1 or 2 Aedui Allies (not Citadels) with Arverni Allies.
Tips. Unshaded pieces placed must belong to the placing Faction
(5.1). Place Allies at Subdued Tribes only (1.4.2). The total number
of pieces placed and/or replaced could be spread among several
Regions.

38. Diviciacus Ae Ro Ar Be
Caesar’s druid: If Aedui and Romans agree, their Command or
defense in Battle may treat Aedui Warbands or Auxilia where to-
gether as the other.
CAPABILITY
Pro-Roman sidelined: Romans and Aedui may not transfer Re-
sources to one another.
Tips. Once the two Factions agree, that agreement holds during that
action (1.5.2) and allows use of the other’s pieces in all applicable
Regions desired.

39. River Commerce Ae Ro S Ar Be S
Goods arteries: Aedui Allies and Citadels in Supply Lines always
yield +2 Resources each in Trade.
CAPABILITY
War interferes: Trade is maximum 1 Region.
Tip. Unshaded Capability means that Aedui Trade will always add
two Aedui Resources per blue Ally and Citadel—whether or not
Romans agreed—as long as they have a Supply Line to Cisalpina
(3.2.1, 4.4.1). Subdued and Roman-Allied Tribes under Aedui
Control would still yield the varying amounts depending on Roman
agreement. The overall effect is to make the Aedui less dependent
on Roman consent for their earnings.

40. Alpine Tribes Ae Ro Be L Ar
Join Gallic campaign: Place up to any 3 Warbands, 2 Auxilia, or
1 Ally in each Region adjacent to Cisalpina. Gain +4 Resources
Threaten communications: For each Region adjacent to Cisalpina
that is not under Roman Control, 5 Roman Resources. Stay Eligible.
Tips. Unshaded placement could include any Faction’s Warbands or
Allies. The choice of piece type could be different for each Region.
The Regions adjacent to Cisalpina are Ubii, Sequani, and Provincia.
Place the cylinder of the Faction executing the shaded Event at the
left edge of the appropriate “Event” box on the Sequence track as
a reminder that it will stay Eligible.

41. Avaricum Ae Ro Be Ar
“Finest city in the whole of Gaul”: If Avaricum is your Ally or
Citadel, do any or all of these with your pieces within 1 Region
of it—place up to 2 Allies; replace 1 Ally with a Citadel; place 1
Fort; then receive +1 Resource per Ally, Citadel, and Fort that you
have there.
Tip. The opportunities would apply among all Regions adjacent to
Avaricum (Bituriges Region) as well as that Region itself.

42. Roman Wine Ae L Ro Be L Ar
Luxury good: Remove either up to any 4 Allied Tribes (not Citadels)
under Roman Control or up to 2 adjacent to Roman Control.
Romanizing tribes lose taste for war: Remove 1-3 Roman or Aedui
Allies (not Citadels) total from Roman-Aedui Supply Lines.
Tips. Unshaded Allies adjacent to Roman Control are those in Re-
gions adjacent to a Roman Control Region. Shaded Roman-Aedui
Supply Lines are any Regions that would at that moment be in Supply
Lines (3.2.1) if Romans and Aedui both agreed.

43. Convictolitavis Ae Ar Ro S Be
Dispute over leadership resolved: Suborn is maximum 2 Regions.
CAPABILITY
Contest with Cotus escalates: Resource costs of Aedui Commands
are doubled.
Tips. Unshaded Suborn works the same within each of the two
Regions—each requires an Underground Aedui Warband, 1 Ally
could be affected in each, all costs paid in each, and so on (4.4.2).

44. Dumnorix Loyalists Ae L Ar L Ro Be
Betrayed by Caesar’s informants: Replace any 4 Warbands with
Auxilia or Aedui Warbands. They free Scout (as if Auxilia).
“Dumnorix’s madness” lingers: Replace any 3 Auxilia or Aedui
Warbands total with any Warbands. They all free Raid.
Tips. Unshaded free Scout could move only the four pieces just
placed; those four could Reveal enemy Warbands (not Auxilia)
and mark them as Scouted only within one Region of Caesar or
with the Roman Successor (even if they are Aedui Warbands, 4.2.2,
5.1.1, 5.4).

45. Litaviccus Ae Ar Ro Be L
Arverni plot thwarted: In each of 2 Regions, replace up to 2 Arverni
Warbands with Aedui Warbands. 4 Arverni Resources to Aedui.
Maneuver behind Caesar: Free Battle against Romans in 1 Region,
using Aedui pieces as your own, Ambushing if able.
Tip. Shaded Battle could use Ambush only if the resulting number
of Hidden attackers exceeded Hidden Auxilia defending (4.3.3).

46. Celtic Rites Ae L Ar Be Ro L
“Much given to religion”: Select 1 or more Gallic Factions. Each
loses 3 Resources and is Ineligible through next card.
“The immortal gods propitiated”: A Gallic Faction executes a free
Command (in multiple Regions). Stay Eligible.
Tip. Place the cylinder of the Faction executing the shaded Event at
the left edge of the appropriate “Event” box on the Sequence track
as a reminder that it will stay Eligible.

47. Chieftains’ Council Ae S Ar S Be S Ro S
Leaders convene: Select a Region with at least 2 non-German Fac-
tions’ pieces. Two or more player Factions there in above order look
at next 2 facedown cards, then may either execute a free Limited
Command (anywhere) or become Eligible.
Tip. If the Faction executing the Event selected itself as one of the
player Factions and chose to become Eligible, place its cylinder at
the left edge of the appropriate “Event” box on the Sequence track
as a reminder.

48. Druids Ae Ar Be Ro S
Arbiters of Celtic society: Select 1-3 Gallic Factions. In the initiative
order above, each executes a free Limited Command that may add
a free Special Ability. Become Eligible after this card.
Tips. The free Special Abilities would each have to be those allowed
to accompany that Faction’s Command Place the cylinder of the Fac-
tion executing the Event at the left edge of the appropriate “Event”
box on the Sequence track as a reminder that it will stay Eligible.

49. Drought Ae L Be Ro L Ar
Food shortage: Each Faction drops to half its current Resources
(rounded down). Place 1 Devastated marker. Each Faction then
removes 1 of its pieces from each Devastated Region (Legions to
Fallen; German Warbands before German Allied Tribes).
Tips. The executing Faction must place a Devastated marker into
any one Region that does not already have one. Each Faction gets to
choose which of its own forces piece (1.4) in the Region to remove.
If the Romans remove a Legion, it goes into the Fallen Legions box
(1.4.1). The Germans avoid removing their Ally discs if at all pos-
sible. After the Event, the Devastated marker will have the usual
effects until Spring (4.3.2).

50. Shifting Loyalties Ae L Be L Ro L Ar L
“In Gaul there are factions…”: Choose 1 Capability of any Fac-
tion. Remove it from play.
Tip. The Event can be used to permanently remove a disadvanta-
geous Capability from the executing or another, friendly Faction,
or an advantageous Capability from a foe.

51. Surus Ae Be Ro S Ar
Aeduan rebel defeated: Replace any 4 Warbands in a Region within
1 of Treveri with Aedui Warbands. Then the Aedui execute a free
Command.
Anti-Roman Aeduan: In a Region within 1 of Treveri, replace up to
4 Aedui Warbands with German March, Raid, or Battle with them.
Tips. The candidate Regions are Treveri, Atrebates, Nervii, both
Germania Regions, Sequani, and Mandubii. Shaded action with
German pieces would be guided by the executing Faction, not by
the Germans Phase sequence (6.2).

52. Assembly of Gaul Ae L Be S Ar L Ro L
“The middle of Gaul”: If Carnutes are Roman Ally, Subdued, or
Dispersed, drop 1 or more Gallic Factions’ Resources each -8.
“A sacred spot”: Faction Controlling Carnutes Region executes a
Command that may add 2 Special Abilities, free.
Tips. The shaded actions are all free but have to follow the usual
rules for space selection and so forth; the free Command could select
several spaces; the two free Special Abilities would each have to be
those allowed to accompany that Command.

53. Consuetudine Ae S Be S Ar Ro S
“Whole life in hunting and military activity”: All Germanic
Warbands to Hidden. Then conduct an immediate Germans Phase
as if Winter, but skip March, and all Germans Ambush.
Tip. Implement the sequence in 6.2 but without Germanic March
(6.2.2) and Battling with Ambush regardless of the numbers of
Hidden enemies (3.4.4).

54. Joined Ranks Ae S Be S Ar S Ro S
Relief force: Executing Faction may free March a group of up to
8 pieces to a Region that already has at least 2 other Gallic and/or
Roman Factions. The executing Faction, then a 2nd player Faction,
may each free Battle there against a 3rd Faction. In the first Battle,
no Retreat allowed.
Tips. March can be by one group (so one origin Region) only, could
include a Leader among the eight pieces, and for Romans or Vercin-
getorix could cover a distance of more than one adjacent Region
(3.2.2, 3.3.2). March origin Region counts as selected for March
(flip Hidden there). The second Faction already in the destination
Region may be a Non-player (8.0) but if so would not Battle. The
Battles would each be at the option of the attacking player Faction
and would add neither Besiege nor Ambush (4.2.3, 4.3.3). The sec-
ond Battle would have to be against the same defender as the first.
Retreat would be allowed only from the second Battle.

55. Commius Be Ro Ar S Ae L
Atrebatian friend: Belgica Regions for Roman Recruit count as
Roman Controlled and +1 Roman Ally.
CAPABILITY
Conspirator: Belgic Rally costs 0 and treats any Region with Belgic
pieces as Belgic Controlled.
Tip. Unshaded Recruit allows Romans in each Belgica Region to
place a Roman Ally at a Subdued Tribe without the need for Roman
Control or even any Roman pieces at all, or to place one more Auxilia
in that Region than they normally would, include one Auxilia if they
normally could place none (3.2.1). Shaded Rally allows Belgae to
place Allies on Subdued Tribes where they have any pieces without
the Belgic Control usually required (3.3.1).

56. Flight of Ambiorix Be Ro Ar Ae L
Chased off: If Ambiorix is in a Roman Controlled Region, or if
Belgic victory is less than 10, remove Ambiorix.
Returned: If Ambiorix is not on the map, place the Belgic Leader
within 1 Region of Germania, symbol up (as Ambiorix).
Tips. Unshaded “Belgic victory” means Belgic Control value plus
Belgic Allies and Citadels (7.2), as shown by the Belgic Control-
Allies marker (1.9). Shaded places Ambiorix in a Germania Region
or in Morini, Nervii, Treveri, or Sequani Region.

57. Land of Mist and Mystery Be L Ro Ar Ae
Beckons: A non-German Faction may free March into Britannia,
add any free Special Ability there, then—if in Britannia—add +4
Resources.
Revolts: Remove an Ally or Dispersed from Britannia, and place
any 1 Gallic Ally and up to 4 Warbands there.
Tips. Unshaded Special Ability need not be one that usually ac-
companies March (4.1) but could not be Besiege or Ambush, which
merely modify Battle Commands (4.2.3, 4.3.3, 5.4). Forces must be
able to reach Britannia by normal March rules; origin Regions count
as selected for March (flip Hidden there). Shaded Event can remove
a Dispersed marker or any Faction’s Ally, and can place any Gallic
Ally and Warbands (not just the executing Faction’s).

58. Aduatuca Be Ro Ae S Ar
P. Sextius Baculus—Heroic Roman defense: Remove 9 Belgic and/
or Germanic Warbands from a Region with a Fort.
Sugambri strike unprepared fort: March Germans to 1 Region
with a Fort. They Ambush Romans there, 1 Loss per 2 Warbands.
Tips. Shaded March would have to be from adjacent Regions
(3.4.2); Ambush regardless of numbers of Hidden pieces (3.4.4,
5.1.1). Inflict one Loss per two Warbands despite the presence of
a defending Fort—the Fort in effect does not in this case halve the
Losses suffered by the defending Romans.

59. Germanic Horse Be Ro Ae L Ar C
Hard-hitting auxiliaries: Romans may inflict 1 Loss per Auxilia
(not ½) in 1 Region per Battle Command.
CAPABILITY
Shock cavalry: If Gallic, take this card. Each Battle Command,
you double enemy’s Losses in 1 Region unless Defender with Fort/
Citadel.
Tips. Unshaded Auxilia inflict one Loss before other modifications
such as halving for Retreat or Citadel (3.2.4) and do so in one Re-
gion during both Roman and non-Roman Battle Commands (that
is, on both attack and defense/counterattack). If Romans have both
unshaded Germanic Horse and Balearic Slingers, Auxilia also
inflict one Loss each not ½ before enemy Battle. Shaded doubling
of Losses is of the total before rounding down (3.3.4) and both
when the holder of the Capability is attacking and when defending,
but not if attacking against a defender with a Fort or Citadel, or if
defending with a Citadel.

60. Indutiomarus Be Ro Ae Ar S
Loses power to Cingetorix: Remove 6 Belgic Warbands and/or Allies
(not Citadels) from the Treveri Region or 1 Region adjacent to it.
Belgic-inspired revolt: Remove any Ally or marker from Treveri and
Ubii. Place Belgic Ally, 2 Belgic and 1 German Warband at each.
Tips. Shaded Treveri and Ubii mean at those Tribe circles specifi-
cally and can remove Dispersed markers.

61. Catuvolcus Be Ar S Ro Ae L
Eburones chief poisons himself: Remove 1 or more Allied Tribes
of the same Faction in the Nervii Region and 5 Warbands there.
Ambiorix co-King: Place Belgic Allies at Nervii and Eburones,
replacing any Allies or Dispersed there. Add +6 Belgic Resources
Tips. The unshaded Warbands can be of the same or any other
Faction(s) as the Allied Tribes (Allies). The shaded Allies are a rare
opportunity to remove Dispersed markers immediately.

62. War Fleet Be L Ar L Ro L Ae L
Coastal maneuver: Move any of your Warbands, Auxilia, Legions,
or Leaders among the Arverni Region, Pictones Region, and Regions
within 1 of Britannia. Then execute a free Command in (or from)
1 of those Regions.
Tips. The candidate Regions include all that touch the ocean west
and north. The Command could be a March out of the Region chosen.

63. Winter Campaign Be Ar Ro Ae L
Corn storage: Romans pay costs of Quarters only in Devastated
Regions.
CAPABILITY
Cold war: Place this card near a Gallic Faction. After each Harvest,
it may do any 2 Commands and/or Special Abilities (paying costs).
Tips. Shaded Special Abilities can be any that apply, without regard
to accompanying Commands, and can be chosen even if the other
action is a March into or out of Britannia. Besiege or Ambush
(4.2.3, 4.3.3), however, would only apply as one of the two actions
in modifying a Battle Command as the other action.

64. Correus Be L Ar S Ae Ro
Deal: Replace up to 8 Belgic Allies plus Warbands in Atrebates
Region with yours (Auxilia for Warbands).
Bellovaci rebel: Remove 2 Allies from the Atrebates Region. Bel-
gae place up to 2 Allies there, then free Rally in 1 Belgica Region
Tips. Unshaded replacement is of up to eight pieces total, Allies plus
Warbands. Shaded in effect replaces other Allies with Belgic Allies
in the Atrebates Region, or leaves Belgic Allies there in place, then
allows Belgic Rally there or in either the Morini or Nervii Region.

65. German Allegiances Be L Ar Ae L Ro L
Intervention: March Germans from up to 2 Regions, then Ambush
with all Germans able.
Fealty: Where you have Control, remove or replace 5 Germanic
Warbands and 1 German Ally with your own (Auxilia for Warbands).
Tips. Unshaded action with German pieces would be guided by the
executing Faction, not by the Germans Phase sequence (6.2); Am-
bush would have to have sufficient Hidden Warbands as usual (3.4.4).

66. Migration Be L Ar S Ae L Ro L
Drang nach Westen: Execute a Germanic Rally then March in/from
up to 2 Regions each.
New pastures: A Gallic Faction moves its Warbands and Leader
as desired to a Region where No Control and places an Ally there.
Tips. Unshaded action with German pieces would be guided by the
executing Faction, not by the Germans Phase sequence (6.2). Shaded
move could be from several Regions and need not be to an adjacent
Region. Ally placement would have to be at Subdued (1.4.2).

67. Arduenna Be Ae Ro Ar L
Gaul’s great forest: Romans or a Gallic Faction may free March
into either or both the Nervii or Treveri Regions, then execute a
free Command except March in one or both, then flip all friendly
pieces there to Hidden.
Tips. Free March could be from any number of origin Regions
from which the Faction could normally March to those destinations
(3.2.2, 3.3.2). Origin Regions count as selected for March (flip Hid-
den there). Scouted Warbands that Marched into Nervii or Treveri
would remove their marker on the March then flip Hidden after the
Command; Scouted Warbands that did not March at the end would
remove the marker and stay Revealed (4.2.2, 5.1.1).

68. Remi Influence Be L Ae L Ro Ar L
Protection: If Remi are a Roman Ally or Subdued, replace 1 or 2
Allies (not Citadels) within 1 Region of Remi with Roman Allies.
Mediation: A Gallic Faction with Remi as Ally may remove anything
at Alesia or Cenabum and place a Citadel there with 4 Warbands.
Tips. Dispersed Remi would not qualify for unshaded; Allies
replaced could belong to any Faction. Shaded allows removal of
Citadel, Ally, or Dispersed or Razed marker from that City; the
Citadel and four Warbands placed into that Region would have to
belong to the placing Faction (5.1).

69. Segni & Condrusi Be S Ae S Ro S Ar
West bank Germans: Place 4 Germanic Warbands each in the Nervii
and Treveri Regions. Then conduct an immediate Germans Phase
as if Winter, but skip Rally.
Tip. All Germans March, Raid, and Battle per 6.2.

70. Camulogenus Be Ae L Ar Ro
Labienus sent: Romans may free March up to 4 Legions & any Aux-
ilia to Atrebates, Carnutes, or Mandubii Region and free Battle there.
Parisii arise: Place 0-6 Warbands among Atrebates, Carnutes, and
Mandubii Regions; select 1 for a free Command + Special Ability
Tips. Unshaded free Roman March could include movement into
second and with Caesar third Regions (3.2.2) but only one destina-
tion, which must be among those listed, and therefore no drop off.
Only the listed, moving forces are involved, so no flipping of pieces
that do not move. Shaded Warbands must belong to the placing
Faction (5.1); the Special Ability must be allowed to accompany
the chosen Command (4.1.1).

71. Colony Be Ae Ar Ro
Settlers arrive: In a Region that you Control or has no Control,
place +1 marker, Colony marker, and your Ally on it. Add +1 to
that Control Value. The Colony is a Tribe.
Tip. This is one of the few Events that alter stacking (1.4.2, 5.1.1).

72. Impetuosity Be L Ae S Ar L Ro L
Rising to the bait: Free March into 1 Region from any adjacent
Either Arverni or Belgae in that Region free Battle against you.
Charging in: Free March 1 group of your Hidden Warbands (no
Leader). That group then may free Battle (alone).
Tips. Unshaded March would have to include a move from at least
one Region (possibly several) to an adjacent Region; origin Region
counts as selected for March (flip Hidden there). Unshaded or shaded
free Battle would not include Ambush. Shaded free Battle could
be with Warbands that Marched within that Region or from one
adjacent Region; it would attack only with the group of Warbands
that just Marched.
