6.0 WINTER
As each Winter card is played, conduct a Winter Round
in the sequence of phases below. The Sequence of Play
sheet and game board also list this sequence.
NOTE: The next card may be viewed normally dur-
ing resolution of a Winter card (2.3.7).
6.1 Victory Phase
If any Faction has met its Victory condition, the game ends now
(EXCEPTIONS: Spare Factions, 1.5.1; 54BC scenario, 2.1; and
1-Player, 8.9); see Victory (7.0) to determine winner and rank order.
If it is the final Winter card (2.4.1), the game also ends; determine
victory per 7.3. If neither, continue the Winter Round.
6.2 Germans Phase
Germanic Forces Rally, March, Raid, and Battle with
Ambush as follows.
NOTE: Individual Germanic pieces may participate
in several types of Commands during the course of a single
Germans Phase.
6.2.1 Germanic Rally.
• First, Rally to place as many Germanic Allied Tribes as possible
per the Rally procedure (3.3.1, 3.4.1), starting with Suebi, then
others in the Germania Regions, then elsewhere.
• Then Rally in those and other Regions to place as many Germanic
Warbands as possible (including where Allies were just placed,
and in un-Devastated Germania Regions even if no Germanic
Allies there).
• Choose among otherwise equal locations randomly (using an
equal chance die roll).
• Adjust Control as needed.
6.2.2 Germanic March.
• Next, form a group of Germanic Warbands to March out of each
Region that has at least one Germanic Warband beyond the pieces
needed for Germanic Control (1.6), regardless of any Rally there.
NOTE: Germans where no Germanic Control or where exactly
enough for such Control therefore would not move.
• March out with as many Warbands as possible without losing
Germanic Control. Move the largest Warband groups first.
• Move into at most one Region with each group (3.3.2, 3.4.2).
Select destination Regions first so that the moving groups can add
Germanic Control (so, not yet German-Controlled), then (among
such Regions if possible, otherwise among others) Regions that are
Controlled by player Factions (not Non-players, 8.0), then other
Regions. Choose among equal candidate locations randomly.
• Adjust Control as needed.
• Flip all Germanic Warbands to Hidden (or remove their Scouted
markers, 4.2.2). (Warbands that did not move in effect Marched
within their Regions.)
6.2.3 Germanic Raid.
• Then, Raid (3.3.3, 3.4.3) with as many Germanic Warbands as
able per below, only against Factions.
• Raid only against Factions that have more than 0 Resources (and
no Fort or Citadel) and only until they reach 0 Resources.
• Raid against player before Non-player Factions (8.0). Otherwise,
choose randomly among target Factions within a Region.
6.2.4 Germanic Battle with Ambush.
• Finally, Battle with Ambush (3.3.4, 3.4.4, 4.1) in each Region
where the Germans currently are able to do so (only wherever
Hidden Germanic Warbands are with another Faction with fewer
Hidden pieces) and would cause an enemy Loss. Adjust Control
as needed.
• Battle player before Non-player Factions (8.0).
• Choose the order of the Battles and among otherwise equal
candidates in each randomly.
6.3 Quarters Phase
Each Faction relocates its Forces on the map as follows (adjusting
Control as needed, 1.6).
NOTE: Factions may transfer Resources during the Quarters
and Harvest Phases (1.5.2).
6.3.1 Germans. All Germanic Warbands in Devastated
Regions (4.3.2) without German Allies and outside Ger-
mania relocate to Germania. Roll a die and relocate all
of them to the Sugambri Region on 1, 2, or 3, or the Ubii Region
on a 4, 5, or 6.
6.3.2 Gauls. First the Belgae, then the Aedui, then the Arverni
relocate and roll for their own Warbands and Leaders on the map
as follows:
• They may relocate any such pieces to any adjacent Regions
without Devastated markers (4.3.2) and under Control (1.6) of
their Faction or a Faction that agrees (not No Control nor German
Control).
• Then they must roll a die for each Warband they have in
Devastated Regions in which they have neither Allied Tribe nor
Citadel and remove the Warband on a roll of 1-3.
6.3.3 Romans. The Romans may relocate any Legions, Auxilia,
and Roman Leader on the map to adjacent, un-Devastated Regions
under Roman Control or Control of a Faction that agrees (not No
Control nor German Control, 1.6). Then, the Romans may relocate
any Legions and Auxilia from Supply Line Regions (3.2.1, deter-
mined at this time for the rest of the Quarters Phase) and then the
Roman Leader from any Region to Provincia. Finally, for each
Legion and Auxilia piece in Regions outside Provincia, the Romans
must choose one:
• Pay to keep it in place—one Roman Resource if the Region has
a Roman Allied Tribe, or two Roman Resources if not, or twice
that amount (two or four total) if it is Devastated (4.3.2). One
such piece per Roman Ally and per Fort may stay in that Region
without such payment.
• Roll a die and remove the piece on a 1-3 (Legion to Fallen).
NOTE: Getting the Roman Leader to Provincia adds Auxilia
during the Senate Phase (6.5.3).
6.4 Harvest Phase
Add to each Faction’s Resources, to a maximum of 45 each (1.8),
as follows.
6.4.1 Roman Earnings. The Romans receive Resources equal to
their current Victory score (Subdued plus Dispersed plus Roman
Allied Tribes, 7.2).
6.4.2 Gallic Earnings. The Arverni, Aedui, and Belgae each receive
Resources equal to twice the number of that Faction’s Allied Tribes
and Citadels.
6.4.3 River Tolls. The Aedui receive a further +4 Resources.
6.5 Senate Phase
The Roman Senate weighs in on the Gal-
lic campaign and sends reinforcements
to Gaul.
DESIGN NOTE: The Senate marker embodies all political affairs
in Rome affecting the Gallic war.
6.5.1 Senate Marker. Various Events (5.0) and this Senate Phase
shift the Senate marker up or down or flip it between “Firm” and not:
• Any shift toward “Uproar” (or “up”) when the Senate marker is
already at Uproar instead flips it to Firm (if not already Firm); any
shift toward “Adulation” (or “down”) when already at Adulation,
also flips it to Firm instead. Any other shift (toward the opposite
end) when Firm instead flips the marker back to normal (without
moving it).
• In this phase, if the current Roman Victory score is below 10, shift
the Roman Senate marker by one box (row) toward Uproar (or
flip the marker per above). If Roman Victory is anywhere from
10 to 12, shift Roman Senate toward Intrigue. If Roman Victory
exceeds 12, shift Roman Senate one row toward Adulation (or flip
per above). EXCEPTION: Do not shift down (toward Adulation,
including to Intrigue from Uproar) if any Legions are in the Fallen
box.
6.5.2 Legions. One half (rounded down) of Legions in the Fallen
Legions box will remain unavailable to reenter the map this Winter.
Move the rest from Fallen to the Legions Track, filling lowest rows
first. Then place into Provincia all Legions that are on the same row
as the Roman Senate marker or above that row.
NOTE: The Roman player may not decline these Legions, nor are
any Legions removed from the map in this phase. Adjust Control
of Provincia, if needed.
6.5.3 Auxilia. If the Roman Leader is in Provincia, place the fol-
lowing number of Auxilia from Available into that Region: three
Auxilia if the Senate is in Uproar, four if Intrigue, five if Adulation.
6.6 Spring Phase
Prepare for the coming year as follows:
• Factions place any Successor Leaders (symbol end down, 1.4.3)
that they have in Available Forces onto the map where that Faction
has a piece or a Home Region “Rally” or “Recruit” symbol (1.3.1).
• Move any remaining Fallen Legions to the Legions Track (1.4.1).
• Remove all Scouted markers (4.2.2), then flip all Revealed
Warbands and Auxilia to Hidden (1.4.3). (All such pieces end the
phase Hidden.)
• Remove all Devastated markers (4.3.2).
• Remove all Dispersed-Gathering markers (only), then flip all
Dispersed Tribes to Dispersed-Gathering (1.7, 3.2.3). (Do not
remove or flip Razed marker from the Sacking Event, 5.0)
• Mark all Factions Eligible (2.3.1).
• Play the next card from the draw deck and reveal the draw deck’s
new top card (2.3.7).
