2.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
2.1 Set Up
Follow the instructions on pages 26-29 of this rule book to choose
a scenario, assign Factions to players, prepare the deck, and set up
markers and Forces.
2.2 Start
Begin play by revealing the top card of the draw deck and placing
it onto a played cards pile face up. Then reveal the next card on top
of the draw deck. The card on the played card stack is played first;
the card on top of the draw deck will be played next.
NOTE: All players will see one card ahead into the deck (2.3.7).
All played cards and the number of cards in the draw deck are
open to inspection.
RECORD STEPS: As the steps of each Event card play
are completed, place short round Eligibility cylinders
corresponding to the Factions involved (1.5) into ap-
propriate boxes of the Sequence of Play track. During
Winter Rounds (6.0), place the Winter marker in the current phase’s
box.
2.3 Event Card
When playing an Event card, up to two Factions will execute a
Command or the Event.
• Factions whose cylinder is in the “Eligible” box receive these
options in the left-to-right order of Faction symbols shown at top
of the card.
• Factions with cylinders in the “Ineligible” box do nothing.
2.3.1 Eligibility. Factions that did not execute a Command or
Event on the previous card are Eligible (their cylinders will start
the turn—that card—in the “Eligible” box per 2.3.6). Factions that
did are Ineligible. (All Factions start the game Eligible.) See also
Free Actions, 3.1.2.
2.3.2 Faction Order. The Eligible Faction with the leftmost symbol
in its color (skipping any Ineligible Factions) is the 1st Eligible to
execute a Command or Event or to Pass. The next leftmost is the
2nd Eligible. NOTE: Ignore any gray details around the Faction
symbols unless using Non-player rules (8.2.1).
2.3.3 Passing. If a currently 1st or 2nd Eligible Faction opts to Pass,
it remains Eligible for the next card and receives +1 Resource if a
Gallic Faction or +2 Resources if Roman. The next leftmost Eligible
Faction then replaces the Passing Faction as the new 1st or 2nd
Eligible Faction and receives the same options to execute or Pass. If
the last (rightmost) Eligible Faction Passes, adjust cylinders (2.3.6)
and play the next card. NOTE: Ineligible Factions or those that do
not become 1st or 2nd Eligible may not Pass.
2.3.4 Options for Eligible Factions.
FIRST ELIGIBLE: If the 1st Eligible Faction does not Pass (2.3.3),
it may execute either:
• A Command (3.0) in one or more Regions—with or without a
Special Ability (4.0)—or
• The Event shown on the card.
OPTIONS FOR 2ND ELIGIBLE: If the 2nd Eligible Faction does
not Pass (2.3.3), it also may execute a Command or possibly the
Event, but its options depend on what the 1st Eligible Faction ex-
ecuted per the above:
• Command Only: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed a Command,
the 2nd Eligible Faction may execute a Limited Command (2.3.5).
• Command & Special Ability: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed
a Command with a Special Ability, the 2nd Eligible Faction may
execute either a Limited Command or the Event.
• Event: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed the Event, the 2nd
Eligible Faction may execute a Command, with a Special Ability
if desired.
NOTE: The game board and Sequence of Play aid sheet also
show these options.
2.3.5 Limited Command. A Limited Command is a player Com-
mand selecting just one Region with no Special Ability. A Limited
Command counts as a Command.
2.3.6 Adjust Eligibility. After the 1st and 2nd Eligible Factions
complete all execution of Commands, Special Abilities, and Events
(or after all Eligible Factions instead have Passed), adjust cylinders
on the Sequence of Play track as follows:
• Any Faction that did not execute a Command or Event (and was
not rendered Ineligible by an Event) to the “Eligible” box.
• Any Faction that executed a Command (including Limited
Command) or Event to the “Ineligible” box (EXCEPTIONS:
Events 5.0, free Actions, 3.1.2. 5.4).
2.3.7 Next Card. After adjusting Eligibility, move the draw deck’s
top card onto the played card pile face-up and reveal the draw deck’s
next card (even if the played card is Winter, 2.4). Play the played
card, proceeding with the appropriate sequence.
2.3.8 Frost. On the last Event card before each Winter
card (2.4), Commands by the Sequence of Play (2.3.4,
including Germanic Commands via Belgic Enlist,
4.5.1) may not use March (3.2.2, 3.3.2).
NOTES: Place the “Frost” marker on the played Event card as
a reminder. Events may still allow March (5.1.1).
Frost does not affect the Germans Phase (6.2.2).
Sudden Frost Option: For less foreknowledge, if all players
agree at Setup (2.1), upon the last Event card before each Winter,
instead switch the places of the two showing cards and conduct an
immediate Winter Round (6.0). The switched Event card will be
the first card of the next Year (unless the game ends that Winter).
2.4 Winter Card
If playing a Winter Card, conduct a Winter Round
(6.0), marking each phase on the Sequence of Play
with the “Winter” marker. NOTE: Set aside Winter
cards (or turn them sideways) to show how many have
gone by. Each series of Event cards up to a Winter
Round is called a “Year”.
2.4.1 Final Winter. If the last Winter card’s Victory Round (6.2)
is completed without a victory, the game ends anyway: determine
victory by 7.3.
