8.0 NON-PLAYERS
This section governs Roman and Gallic Factions as an option to
substitute for players when fewer than four players are available,
including for solitaire (1.5). NOTE: If players among themselves are
running the Romans and the three Gallic Factions, this entire sec-
tion is not needed! “Non-players” can substitute for any of the four
player Factions, but the following combinations are recommended:
• With three players, use either the Belgae or Aedui Non-player and
play the other three Factions.
• With two players, play Romans and Arverni and use the Belgae
and Aedui Non-players.
• With one player, play Romans or Arverni and use the remaining
three Non-players
NOTE: The Germanic Tribes Faction is not a player and has
its own rules in sections above, especially 3.4 and 6.2. The term
“Non-player” refers to a substitute for a Gallic or Roman Fac-
tion typically run by a player.
The following four subsections (8.1-8.4) apply to all Non-player
Factions. They are summarized on the “Non-Player Guidelines”
aid sheet.
8.1 Non-Players and Sequence of Play
A Roman or Gallic Faction run by rules section 8 is a Non-Player.
Whenever such a Non-Player Faction has an opportunity to act by
the Sequence of Play (2.3), consult its Non-Player flowchart sheet
and the corresponding rules herein (8.5-8.8) to determine its actions,
such as which Command it will execute, or whether it will opt for an
Event, or will Pass. Non-players follow the same rules as players—
normal Resource costs, requirements, and procedures apply—except
as specified in rule 8.1.2 (Limited Commands).
8.1.1 Command or Event? When a Non-player has a choice be-
tween Event and Command, the flowchart will show which it selects.
In general, Non-players decline the following Events:
• Ineffective Events—those that, in the current situation and
following any relevant Non-player instructions (8.2.1), either
would have no effect or would merely Reveal (1.4.3) own pieces
(EXAMPLE: Battle that cannot cause an enemy Loss). Adding
or removing a Capability is an effect.
• Capabilities (5.3) during the last year of the game (when the next
Winter will be final).
• “No” Events listed at the bottom of each Non-player flowchart
sheet (and on the Non-player Instructions sheet) and noted by
crossed swords at that Faction’s symbol on that Event card (8.2.1).
INEFFECTIVE EVENT EXAMPLE: Non-player Belgae are
Eligible to play shaded Flight of Ambiorix. Ambiorix is on the
map, so nothing would happen. The Belgae opt for a Command
and Special Ability instead.
8.1.2 Non-Player Commands Not Limited. When a 2nd Eligible
Non-Player by the Sequence of Play is to execute a Limited Com-
mand (2.3.4-.5), the Non-player instead receives a full Command
plus a Special Ability option. NOTE: A Limited Command by Event,
such as Druids, remains Limited (5.1.1).
DESIGN NOTE: Non-players receive this benefit to aid them
against cleverer human players.
8.1.3 Reading the Flowcharts. The Second Edition Non-Player
flowcharts show priorities with circled numbers (e.g., u, v, j, k)
and colored letters (e.g., , ) to indicate their order and nature:
• Numbered priorities (e.g., u, j) are sequential priorities. Execute
the instructions in each sequential priority to the maximum extent
before moving to the next sequential priority (8.3). Some top-level
sequential priorities (black circles; e.g., u, v) contain further
sequential priorities (white circles; e.g., j, k) that are parts of
and sequential steps to that top-level priority.
• Lettered priorities (e.g., , ) are nested priorities. Nested
priorities act as tie breakers within the sequential priorities to
which they are ordained. Each nested priority further narrows the
thus-far selected set of spaces or targets. For readability, nested
priorities have a shaded background .
8.2 Executing Events
When a Non-player by their flowchart is to execute an Event, apply
the following.
8.2.1 Instructions. Certain Events have instructions for certain
Non-player Factions. The cards for these Events have gray symbols
at the edges of that Faction’s symbol as a cue:
Laurels indicate that the Event has a special
instruction for that Non-player Faction on the
Non-Player Instructions sheet, about how that
Non-player will execute the Event. Some
Instructions call for treating the Event as a
“No” Event (8.1.1), under certain circumstances—return to the
flowchart to determine a Command.
Swords indicate that that Non-player Faction
will decline the Event and execute Command
and Special Ability instead (8.1.1). Such
Events are listed as “No” Events on both that
Faction’s flowchart and that Faction’s section
of the Event Instructions sheet.
A Carnyx (Celtic battle trumpet) at the Arverni symbol
indicates that the Non-player Arverni will automati-
cally execute the Event without first rolling a 1-4 (8.7.2).
Such Events are listed as “Auto 1-4” on both the
Arverni flowchart and section of the Event Instructions
sheet.
When a Faction executes an Event that gives actions to another,
Non-player Faction, the 2nd Faction’s Event special instructions
(if any) apply to how it executes them.
EXAMPLE: An Aedui player executes unshaded Germanic
Chieftains, causing a Non-player Roman to March Germans;
the Event has laurels at the Roman symbol—check the Roman
Non-player Event instructions for Germanic Chieftains.
8.2.2 Dual Use. As noted on the Non-player flowcharts, Non-player
Arverni and Belgae opt for shaded Event text (5.2), if any, Roman
and Aedui unshaded.
NOTE: Instructions (8.2.1) may reverse this guidance for certain
Events.
8.2.3 Event-Driven Actions. Unless Non-player Instructions (8.2.1)
for a given Event specify otherwise:
• When Non-players by Event text are to carry out Commands
and/or Special Abilities (free actions, 5.4; or Winter Campaign),
follow that Faction’s Non-Player flowchart to implement them
(unless otherwise specified in Event Instructions, 8.2.1), applying
the flowchart’s conditions and priorities to the relevant Regions
(including for Commands with Germans, such as shaded Surus).
For multiple free Non-player Commands (such as “March then
Battle”), use the priorities for the first. NOTE: If a choice among
Commands, use the Faction’s flowchart to select one. If there is
a choice among Special Abilities alone, follow the flowchart to
see which Command and Special Ability is selected, but ignore
the Command. For free March when the flowchart does not point
to a particular March box, use the bottom one.
• When there is a choice of who gets Event benefits (such as free
actions, Capabilities, Resources, or pieces), Non-players select
themselves only. If not possible, treat the Event as Ineffective
and select a Command instead (8.1.1). EXAMPLE: Non-player
Arverni are up for shaded Dumnorix Loyalists but have no
Warbands Available; the text offers a choice of replacing enemy
pieces with “any Warbands”; in order to carry out the Event fully
(5.1.3), Arverni would have to select and place another Faction’s
Warbands, so they execute Command & Special Ability instead.
• Within the above (if applicable), select Event spaces to ensure
that as many Legions, then Citadels, then Allies, then other pieces
as possible are placed, removed, or replaced (8.3.1). Within that,
use the priorities in 8.4.1.
• When a Non-player executing an Event has a choice that is not
otherwise prioritized, choose randomly among the possibilities
(8.3.4).
8.3 Selecting Regions, Tribes, or Targets
When executing Non-player actions, select Regions, Tribes, or target
Factions per Command and Special Ability priorities on the Non-
Player flowcharts and corresponding rules below (8.5-8.8), and per
specific Event Instructions (8.2.1) if any, and otherwise general Event
guidelines above (8.2.3), as applicable. Do so for each individual
listed priority in order, until there are no more legal candidates or
actions for that priority, or until any space limit within that priority
is reached. Then move on to the next priority and do the same, until
any overall limit for the Command or Special Ability is reached, or
until the Faction runs out of Resources (if applicable). Sometimes,
priorities will provide a precedence of what should be selected first;
if not, select equal candidates randomly per below (8.3.4).
8.3.1 Event Location Selection. Within above guidelines for
Event-driven actions (8.2.3) and Event Instructions (8.2.1, if any),
Non-players select Event Regions and Tribes (including for use of
Capabilities) to benefit themselves first; then to ensure that Event text
“places” the most own or “removes” or “replaces” the most enemy
Legions, then Citadels, then Allies, then other pieces possible (net
by Faction); then randomly. Unless otherwise specified, carry out
actions as fully as possible in the selected Region before moving
on to select others.
8.3.2 Placing Leaders. Place Leaders as soon as able (by Event,
Spring, or scenario special rule) where the most own pieces.
8.3.3 Using Capabilities. Non-players use Capabilities that they
have received that apply to a limited number of Regions in the first
Regions that apply, unless otherwise specified.
8.3.4 Random Selection. Similarly to Germanic actions during the
Germans Phase (6.2), whenever equal candidate Regions, Tribes, or
target Factions are offered to a Non-player, select using an equal-
chance die roll.
PLAY NOTE: In the rare case of more than six candidates, split
them into multiple groups of six or less, as evenly as possible;
roll to select a group; then roll within the group, spare numbers
calling for a full reroll. For example, with seven candidates, a
roll of 1-3 selects the first four, 4-6 the last three; then a roll of
1-4 if the first set, 1-3 if the second selects the final candidate;
any other second roll requires a reroll of the first die.
8.4 Other Guidelines
Unless otherwise specified, Non-players carry out whatever actions
apply to the maximum extent (such as in the most Regions or with
the most pieces allowed, and only as long as needed pieces and
Resources are Available).
8.4.1 Placing, Moving and Removing Pieces. Unless otherwise
specified, once spaces involved are selected (8.2.3), Non-players
as possible:
• Place and move own and target or remove enemy Leaders, then
Legions, then Citadels or Forts, then Allied Tribes in Cities or
at Remi, then other Allied Tribes, then Hidden before Revealed
before Scouted enemy Warbands or Auxilia; take Losses on or
remove own pieces in the reverse order.
• Within that, if Belgae or Arverni, target Romans, then Aedui, then
each other, then Germans; if Roman or Aedui, target Arverni, then
Belgae, then Germans, then each other.
• As they are able, move their own pieces to end the move with at
least four of their own Warbands or Auxilia in the same Region
as their Leader.
• Remove pieces to be replaced even if no pieces are Available to
replace them.
• Never voluntarily remove own pieces (1.4.1).
NOTE: See also Placing Leaders, 8.3.2 above.
8.4.2 Transfer, Agreement, Harassment. As specified on their
flowcharts:
• Non-player Belgae and Arverni never voluntarily transfer
Resources (1.5.2), nor agree to have Regions they Control
be part of a Supply Line (3.2.1) or used for another Faction’s
Retreat (3.2.4) or Quarters (6.3). Non-player Aedui and Romans
sometimes do so, for Romans or Aedui (8.6.6, 8.8.6).
• Non-player Belgae and Arverni Harass Roman March and Seize
(3.2.2, 3.2.3) wherever they can. Non-player Aedui and Romans
Harass Vercingetorix March (3.3.2).
8.4.3 Non-Player Retreat. Non-Players Retreat (3.2.4) from enemy
Battle as follows:
• When needed to ensure the survival of their last Defending piece.
• If Roman, when needed to lower the number of forced Loss rolls
against Legions.
• If defending without a Fort or Citadel and a Retreat itself would
not remove any defending pieces, when they cannot guarantee
inflicting at least half the Losses against the Attacker that they
will suffer (regardless of how many pieces might be removed by
the Losses).
Gauls Retreating from Romans leave all Hidden Warbands in place.
Retreating Non-players join their Leader with the greatest number
of own pieces possible (in place or adjacent).
8.4.4 Frost and Player Victory. While a Winter card is showing
(2.3.8), Non-players take no action that could directly (through that
Non-player’s actions alone) advance any player Faction above or
any further beyond its victory threshold (7.2), including via any die
roll outcome or player agreement. The Non-player instead moves
on to the next candidate target or priority.
NOTE: This restriction applies to one player games, even though
the player does not win before the final Winter (8.9). It does not
apply to advancing other Non-players.
8.5 Non-Player Belgae Actions
This subsection governs actions by the Belgae Faction
when a Non-player, as shown on the “Non-Player Bel-
gae” flowchart sheet.
NOTE: It is not necessary to master the lengthy rules below
before playing; use the flowcharts and refer here only as needed
for clarification of the charts’ shorthand. Also, see the Playbook
for examples and illustrations.
8.5.1 Battle or March under Threat? Non-player Belgae, when
Eligible, check for threats or Battle opportunities and, if any, either
Battle against or March away from those threats. If the Belgae have
Ambiorix or a group of at least four Belgic Warbands in any Region
where any non-Germanic enemy (Romans, Arverni, or Aedui) has
an Ally, a Citadel, a Legion, or separately at least four pieces, the
Belgae may Battle, as follows.
The Belgae will Battle (maybe with Ambush or Enlist, or after
Rampage, see below) only in Regions where they will inflict more
Losses on the enemy (3.3.4) than they will suffer, and no Loss on
Ambiorix, presuming all Defender Loss rolls result in Defender
removals (the best possible case for the Belgic Attack), and taking
into account any Special Ability such as Ambush, and so on:
• First, check whether Ambiorix meets the initial Battle-or-March
condition above (he is with a non-German enemy that has at
least four pieces, an Ally, Citadel, or a Legion). If he does but
nevertheless will not Battle (because he could not guarantee
enough enemy Losses, would suffer a Loss himself, or is
outnumbered—see below), the Belgae do not Battle at all, but
instead March per below.
• Next, check whether the first Battle Region will result in Ambush
and, if not, whether Rampage will precede Battle, or whether
instead any Battles will include Enlist. (See the relevant sections
below.)
• Now the Belgae Battle the enemies triggering the Battle condition
above. Within that, first Ambiorix fights against such an enemy
that has fewer mobile pieces (Leader, Legions, Auxilia, Warbands)
than the Belgae do (if it is possible within the Loss requirements
above).
• Finally, the Belgae next Battle non-German enemies where they
can (where the Belgae are able to inflict more Losses than they will
suffer). (Set order or targets among equal candidates randomly,
8.3.4). They select applicable Battle Regions until they run out
of candidate Regions or of Resources. NOTE: Non-player Belgae
do not Battle against Germans.
If no Battle occurred per the above priorities, the Belgae instead
March as follows:
• March all mobile Belgic Forces out of each Region that either
meets the “Battle or March under Threat” condition above or
has the Belgic Leader but not the single largest group of Belgic
Warbands on the map. Keep Marching groups from each origin
together. March first with the Belgic Leader (and the Belgic
Warbands with him) then with other groups.
• The above Marching groups move into at least one destination
Region and up to the number of destinations equal to the number
of origin Regions. They do not enter any of the above Regions
that other Belgae are departing. Within those restrictions, they
March so that each Marching group ends within a distance of
one Region of (same or adjacent to) the most Regions that have
Belgic pieces possible. Within that objective, they choose Regions
that have no Belgic Control so as to add the most Belgic Control
(victory score, 7.2) possible (if any, and otherwise random).
IF NONE: If no Battle or March occurred (including because Bel-
gae have 0 Resources, or because Frost blocked March per 2.3.8),
proceed to 8.5.2 below to consider whether the Belgae will Pass or
play the Event.
AMBUSH: If the Belgae are Battling per above, can Ambush in any
of those Battles, they do so—but only where the enemy’s Retreat out
of that Region could lower the number of pieces it would remove,
or Battle could allow a Counterattack to inflict at least one Loss on
the Belgae (3.3.4). NOTE: A defending Legion or Leader would
meet the 2nd requirement, because it could survive multiple die roll
Losses to then inflict one Loss in Counterattack.
• If they Ambushed in the 1st Battle per above, they also do so in
each other Battle possible.
• If no such Ambush is possible, the Belgae instead Rampage before
Battle—or, if that is not possible, Enlist—per below.
RAMPAGE: The Belgae Rampage before the Command if Battle or
after if Rally or Raid. They do so with whatever Hidden Warbands
possible and as needed to remove or Retreat enemies—
• First, to force removal of pieces, assuming no Faction grants
Retreat to their Control (4.5.2).
• Then, to add the most Belgic Control value.
• Then elsewhere, first to Retreat or Remove as many Romans as
possible, then Aedui, then Arverni.
• However, the Belgae do not Rampage against the last target piece
in any Battle Region (so that there will always still be a Battle).
• If no such Rampage is possible—or if the Command was March—
the Belgae instead Enlist per below.
ENLIST: If there is any already selected Battle Region in which the
Belgae could Enlist Germanic Warbands to add to enemy Losses and/
or absorb Losses from a possible Counterattack, the Belgae do so
(absorb Losses with Germanic Warbands before Belgic Warbands).
If not, the Belgae instead Enlist to add a free Germanic Command
in (or from) one Region, after executing their Command.
• If possible to inflict any Loss on an enemy, they cause the Germans
to Battle against a player Faction or, if none, another Non-player.
• If not possible, they cause a Germanic March with at least two
Warbands and the most Warbands able as follows. If able, move
them out of a Belgica or Germania Region and into a Region
Controlled by a player then Non-player enemy (Romans, Arverni,
or Aedui). If not, March within a Region in order to Hide or
remove Scouted markers from at least two Revealed Warbands
and the most possible.
• If not able to so March, and if a German Rally could place a piece,
they cause a Rally to place an Ally if able then most Warbands
able.
• If not able to so Rally, they cause a German Raid against a player
(only) who would lose at least one Resource to the Raid.
• If none apply, or if the Command was a March into or out of
Britannia, the Belgae instead add no Special Ability (Command
only, 2.3.4).
8.5.2 Pass or Event? If the initial Battle-or-March condition above
is not met—or if no such Battle or March was possible—the Belgae
might Pass in order to be 1st Eligible on the next card, or might
play the Event.
• Check the Faction order (2.3.3) on the currently played and next
showing cards. If the Belgic symbol is first of the four symbols
on the next upcoming card but not on the currently played card
(regardless of Faction Eligibility cylinders), roll a die to see if the
Belgae Pass (2.3.3): on a roll of 1-4, they Pass. NOTE: Thus, they
do not Pass if 1st on both cards or if Winter is showing.
• If the Belgae do not Pass, check whether they have
the option to execute the Event (because they are 1st
Eligible, or because the 1st Eligible Faction used a
Special Ability, 2.3.4). If not, proceed to 8.5.3 below
to consider whether the Belgae will Rally. If so, check
whether the Event would be Ineffective, would add a
Capability during the game’s final year, or is listed as “No Belgae”
(8.1.1; the Belgae symbol on the card would have gray crossed
swords, 8.2.1)—if any apply, proceed to 8.5.3 Rally.
NOTE: If the Belgae symbol on the Event card has
gray laurels, see the Non-player Belgae section of the
Event Instructions sheet (8.2.1).
• If none of the above applies to the Event, the Belgae execute it
per 8.2. NOTE: Any Non-player Belgae Event Instructions (8.2.1)
may render the Event Ineffective or “No Belgae”; if so, proceed
to 8.5.3.
8.5.3 Rally? If the Belgae have neither Battled, Marched, Passed,
nor executed the Event, they Rally if doing so would place a Belgic
Ally, a Citadel, or at least three Belgic Warbands total, or if it would
add to Belgic Control. NOTE: If the Belgae have 0 Resources, a
normal (not free, 5.4) Rally would not place any pieces.
• First, replace a Belgic Ally in a City with a Citadel.
• Then, place all Belgic Allies possible.
• Finally, place all Belgic Warbands possible, first where they would
add any Belgic Control.
RAMPAGE OR ENLIST: After Rallying, the Belgae Rampage or
Enlist per 8.5.1 above.
8.5.4 Raid? If no other Command, Pass, or Event conditions were
met, the Belgae will either Raid to replenish Resources or March.
Check the Belgae’s Resources—if fewer than four Resources, roll
a die and on a roll of 1-4, they attempt to Raid. If Raiding per be-
low would gain the Belgae at least two Resources total, they Raid
wherever they can, in the following order.
• First, Raid to take Resources from players; within that, Romans
then Aedui then others.
• Then Raid in non-Devastated Regions without taking Resources
from any Faction (do not take Non-players’ Resources).
IF NONE: If the Belgae are to Raid but cannot gain enough Re-
sources per above, they Pass.
RAMPAGE OR ENLIST: After Raiding, the Belgae Rampage or
Enlist per 8.5.1 above.
8.5.5 March to add Control? If the Belgae did not Battle, March,
Rally or play the Event per the above, and they have at least four
Resources or have fewer Resources but rolled a 5 or 6, they March
into up to three Regions to claim Control and to join their Leader
with a larger group of Warbands.
• First, March Warbands to add Control to one Region—a Belgica
Region if possible; within that, where the movement of the fewest
Warbands is needed to do so.
• If the above destination is in Belgica, move in with the most
Warbands able, but leaving one Belgic Warband behind per origin
Region and enough not to remove any Belgic Control; if not in
Belgica, move in the fewest Warbands to take Belgic Control.
• Then, March into a 2nd Region per the above priorities, if able.
• Finally, March the Belgic Leader alone into one of the destination
Regions above if needed to join him with the largest number of
Belgic pieces able, or alone to another Region if needed to end the
Command with a group of at least four Belgic Warbands. NOTE:
The Leader’s move may result in the removal of Belgic Control
from a Region.
IF NONE: If the Belgae cannot so March (for example, during Frost,
2.3.8), they instead Raid per 8.5.4 above.
ENLIST: After Marching, the Belgae Enlist per 8.5.1 above. (If they
Marched into or out of Britannia, they add no Special Ability, 4.1.3.)
8.5.6 Quarters. During Quarters Phase (6.3.2), Non-player Belgae
first leave Devastated Regions where they have no Ally or Citadel
for random adjacent Regions that they Control (if they can). They
then (or thereby) move their Leader and/or one group of Warbands,
so as to join the Leader with the largest group of Belgic Warbands
able and, within that, to get or keep the Leader within one Region
of the most Regions with Belgic Forces able. They leave behind
at least one Warband and at least the number Warbands needed to
retain any Belgic Control.
8.6 Non-Player Aedui Actions
This subsection governs actions by the Aedui Faction
when a Non-player, as shown on the “Non-Player Aedui”
flowchart sheet.
8.6.1 Event? Unlike other Non-players, the Aedui first check about
either Passing to be 1st Eligible on the next card or playing the Event.
• Check the Faction order on the currently played and next showing
cards. If the Aedui symbol is 1st on the next upcoming card but
not on the currently played card (regardless of Faction Eligibility
cylinders), roll a die: on a roll of 1-4, the Aedui Pass (2.3.3).
• Otherwise, check if the Aedui have the option to play the Event
(because they are 1st Eligible, or the 1st Eligible Faction used
a Special Ability, 2.3.4); if not, they proceed to 8.6.2 below to
consider doing Battle.
• If they do have that option, check whether the Event
would be Ineffective, would add a Capability during
the game’s final year, or is listed as “No Aedui” at the
bottom of the flowchart (8.1.1; the Aedui symbol on
the card would have swords, 8.2.1)—if so, proceed
to 8.6.2.
NOTE: If the Aedui symbol on that card has laurels,
see Aedui on the Event Instructions sheet (8.2.1).
• If none of the above applies, the Aedui execute the Event per
8.2. NOTE: Any Non-player Aedui Event Instructions (8.2.1)
may render the Event Ineffective or “No Aedui”; if so, proceed
to 8.6.2 Battle.
8.6.2 Battle? If the Aedui do not play the Event, they next check for
an opportunity to harm key enemy pieces in Battle. If Aedui Battle
in any Region would be sure to inflict a Loss on an enemy Leader,
Ally, Citadel, or Legion (accounting for which enemy the Aedui
would Battle, any Aedui Ambush, a possible enemy Retreat, Aedui
Resources, and so on), the Aedui Battle.
• Battle against other Gauls or Germans; Battle against Romans only
if the Aedui are at that moment exceeding their victory threshold
(the Aedui have more Allies plus Citadels than any other Faction,
7.2).
• Battle first to inflict Losses on such enemies’ Leaders, Allies,
Citadels, or Legions. Then Battle in additional Regions where
the Aedui are sure to inflict at least one Loss and at least as many
Losses on the enemy as they will take (again accounting for
Ambush and so on).
AMBUSH: If the Aedui are Battling per above, they Ambush in
the first of those Battles in which the enemy’s Retreat out of that
Region could lower how many pieces it would remove, and/or a
Counterattack could inflict at least one Loss on the Aedui (3.3.4).
• If no such Ambush is possible, the Aedui instead Trade after Battle
per 8.6.3 below.
8.6.3 Rally? If the Aedui did not play the Event nor Battle, they
Rally if they have fewer than five Warbands on the map, or if Ral-
lying (alone, without any Suborn) would place a Citadel, Ally, or at
least three pieces (Warbands) total.
• First, replace any Allies in Cities with Citadels.
• Then, place all Allies possible.
• Finally, place all Warbands possible.
IF NONE: If the Aedui have fewer than five Warbands but were
unable to Rally any pieces, they instead Raid per 8.6.4 below.
TRADE: Then, if either the Aedui just Battled (8.6.2), or Aedui
Resources are at that moment below 10, or if Aedui plus Roman
Resources together add up to less than 15, the Aedui might Trade.
They Trade only if either the Aedui are currently acting as the 2nd
Eligible Faction (2.3.4) or if Trading would earn the Aedui more
than two Resources, accounting for which other Factions agree to
a Supply Line (4.4.1); players must now say whether they agree or
not (Non-player Romans always agree, 8.8.6). If the Aedui Trade,
they do so for all the Resources they can obtain.
• If no such Trade is possible, the Aedui instead Suborn per below
or—if the Command was a Battle or included March into or out
of Britannia—they add no Special Ability.
SUBORN: In one Suborn Region, or in each of two Suborn Regions
if the unshaded Capability Convictolitavis is in effect, the Aedui:
• Place an Aedui Ally, if possible.
• If not able to do so, instead remove an enemy’s Ally—first, from
the Faction that currently has the most Allies plus Citadels total
(and therefore is most hindering Aedui victory); within that
priority, remove a Non-player Roman’s Allies only when no other
enemy Ally can be removed.
• Once no more Allies can be affected, continue by placing all Aedui
Warbands able; then by removing most Arverni, then Belgae, then
Germanic Warbands able; finally, by removing Auxilia.
• If none of the above is possible, add no Special Ability (executing
a Command only).
8.6.4 Raid? If Rallying would not be able to place the required
pieces, check Aedui Resources. If they have fewer than four Re-
sources and roll 1-4 on a die, they attempt to Raid. Otherwise,
they will attempt to March per 8.6.5 below. If attempting to Raid,
they carry through only if doing so would gain them at least two
Resources total (otherwise Pass per below). They Raid wherever
they can, in the following order.
• First, Raid to take Resources from any player Factions currently at
0 or better victory margin (7.3), then from any other non-Roman
enemies, then in non-Devastated Regions from no Faction (only;
do not take Resources from Romans unless player at 0+ victory).
IF NONE: If the Aedui have fewer than four Resources and rolled a
1 through 4 but cannot gain enough Resources per above, they Pass.
8.6.5 March? If the Aedui did not Battle, Rally, Raid, nor play the
Event, have at least four Resources, or have fewer Resources but
rolled a 5 or 6, they March to spread their Suborning emissaries
into enemy territory and perhaps to claim Control of a new Region.
• Move Warbands to achieve the following only as possible without
removing last Aedui Warband or Aedui Control from any Region.
• First, they move out of just one Region to add one Hidden Aedui
to each of up to three adjacent Regions that has no Hidden Aedui
Warband at the moment. Select as the first destinations, Regions
with Allies or Citadels of the enemy Factions that currently have
the most Allies or Citadels total.
• Then, if possible, they move Warbands to add Aedui Control to
one Region (possibly in addition to Control just added, or to add
Control to a destination above). They do so by moving fewest
Warbands possible.
IF NONE: If the Aedui cannot so March (for example, because of
Frost, 2.3.8), they instead Raid per 8.6.4 above.
TRADE OR SUBORN: After Marching, the Aedui Trade or Suborn
per 8.6.3 above (unless the March moved into or out of Britannia,
4.1.3).
8.6.6 Resources, Supply Lines, Retreat. Non-player Aedui do not
voluntarily transfer Resources (1.5.2) to Arverni or Belgae, nor agree
to Arverni or Belgae movement into Aedui-Controlled Regions in
Retreat (3.2.4) or Quarters (6.3). However, the Non-player Aedui
will transfer 10 Resources to the Romans at each instant that Ro-
man Resources drop below two while the Aedui have more than 20
Resources; will allow Roman Retreat or Quarters into Aedui Control,
and will agree to a Supply Line (3.2.1) in Aedui-Controlled Regions
during Roman actions if any of the below apply.
• The Roman is a Non-player.
• T h e R o m a n i s a p l a y e r a n d h a s a v i c t o r y s c o r e
(Subdued+Dispersed+Allies, 7.2) of less than 10.
• The Roman is a player and has a victory score of 10, 11, or 12,
but only on a die roll of 1-4.
If Non-player Aedui failed to agree to a Roman Supply Line because
the above roll was a 5 or 6, the Roman player may rechoose the
current action (Recruit, 3.2.1; Build, 4.2.1; or Quarters relocation,
6.3.3), if desired.
NOTE: Non-player Aedui do not so transfer Resources to Roman
players—nor agree to a Roman Supply Line/Retreat/Quarters—
while the Roman score is above 12. They never Harass Roman
March or Seize; they Retreat the same as other Non-players
(see 8.4.2-.3).
8.6.7 Quarters. During the Quarters Phase (6.3.2), Non-player
Aedui move only to leave Devastated Regions where they have no
Ally or Citadel, if they can.
8.6.8 Diviciacus. While the unshaded Capability Diviciacus is in
effect, the Non-player Aedui agree to have Aedui Warbands act as
Auxilia during Roman Command or defense only while the Roman
victory score (Subdued+Dispersed+Allies, 7.2) is 12 or less and
never where Romans are Battling or Scouting against Aedui. Dur-
ing their own Commands, Non-player Aedui use Auxilia as Aedui
Warbands to the maximum degree that Romans agree (including
removing Auxilia instead of Warbands), except that they place
Auxilia by Rally only if the Roman is a Non-player and no Aedui
Warbands are Available.
8.7 Non-Player Arverni Actions
This subsection governs actions by the Arverni Faction
when a Non-player, as shown on the “Non-Player
Arverni” flowchart sheet.
8.7.1 Battle or March under Threat? Non-player Arverni, when
Eligible, check for threats calling for either fight or flight, especially
involving Vercingetorix. If the Arverni have Vercingetorix or a group
of at least ten Arverni Warbands in any Region where the Romans or
Aedui have an Ally, a Citadel, a Legion, or separately at least four
pieces, the Arverni Battle (maybe with Ambush or after Devastate
or Entreat, see below).
The Arverni do so only in Regions where they will force at least one
Loss (roll or removal) on a Legion and/or will inflict more Losses
on the enemy (3.3.4) than they will suffer—and only if no Loss on
Vercingetorix is possible, presuming all Defender Loss rolls result
in Defender removals (the best possible case for the Arverni Attack),
and taking into account any Special Ability, Capability, and so on:
• First, check whether Vercingetorix meets the initial Battle-or-
March condition above (he is with Romans or Aedui who have
a Citadel, Ally, Legion, or at least four pieces). If he does but
nevertheless will not Battle (because he could not guarantee
enough enemy Losses, would suffer a Loss himself, or does not
have enough Forces against Caesar—see below), the Arverni do
not Battle at all, but instead March per below.
• For all Battle Regions, pay Resources as soon as selected, so that
any Devastate or Entreat will occur after Battles are paid.
• Next, check whether the first Battle Region will result in Ambush
and, if not, whether Devastate or Entreat will precede resolution
of any Battles. (See those sections below.)
• Now the Arverni Battle the enemies triggering the Battle
condition above. Within that, first Vercingetorix fights Romans.
If Vercingetorix is with Caesar, he Battles only if the Arverni
have more than twice as many mobile pieces (Warbands plus
Vercingetorix) in the Region as do the Romans (Legions plus
Auxilia plus Caesar) there.
• Finally, the Arverni next Battle against Romans or Aedui or player
Belgae (only) in spaces that did not trigger the Battle Command
above (and where the Arverni also meet the overall Loss restriction
above). NOTE: Non-player Arverni do not Battle against Non-
player Belgae or Germans.
If no Battle occurred per the above priorities, the Arverni instead
March (if with Vercingetorix, within Harassment restriction below)
thus:
• For all March origins, pay Resources as soon as selected, so that
any Devastate or Entreat will occur after Marches are paid.
• First, Vercingetorix and all of his Warbands March out of his
current Region into another Region, to join the most Arverni pieces
able (resolving movement after any Special Ability, if possible,
see below).
• Then, move all other Warbands possible to get them closer to
Vercingetorix (counting by adjacent Regions), but leave one
Arverni Warband behind in each origin Region.
VERCINGETORIX MARCH AND HARASSMENT: Arverni with
Vercingetorix March into a 2nd Region (3.3.2) as needed to fulfill
March priorities, by routes that will inflict the fewest possible Ha-
rassment Losses on them (3.2.4, including because a player Faction
agrees that it will not Harass that March, 1.5.2), and only to Regions
that they can reach suffering no more than three Losses that March
and none on Vercingetorix.
IF NONE: If no Battle or March occurred, proceed to 8.7.2 below
to consider the Event.
AMBUSH: If the Arverni are Battling per above and canAmbush in
the first of those Battles, they do so—but only if the lack of Ambush
would allow the enemy’s Retreat out of that Region to reduce its
pieces removed, or would allow a Counterattack to inflict at least one
Loss on the Arverni (3.3.4). NOTE: A defending Legion or Leader
would meet the 2nd requirement, because it could survive multiple
die roll Losses to then inflict one Loss in Counterattack.
• If they Ambushed in the 1st Battle per above, they also do so in
each other Battle possible.
• If no such Ambush is possible, the Arverni instead Devastate
before Battle—or, if not possible, Entreat before Battle—per
below.
DEVASTATE: The Arverni, if able, Devastate immediately before
they move (after paying for the Command) during a March away
from a threat per above. If able to Devastate only after they move,
they do that instead. They Devastate before a Battle Command, or
after other March, Rally, or Raid.
• They Devastate wherever they can that will force removal of a
Legion or two Auxilia or of at least one enemy piece and as many
Roman plus Aedui pieces combined as it will Arverni pieces from
the Region.
• If no such Devastate is possible, the Arverni instead Entreat per
below.
NOTE: Executing Devastate (or Entreat, below) immediately
before Vercingetorix’s March away can save paying a 2nd Re-
source for selecting a now Devastated Region as March origin
(3.3.2, 4.3.2), and ensures that Arverni with just one Resource
spend it on the March rather than on any Entreat.
ENTREAT: As with Devastate, the Arverni Entreat immediately
before moving (after paying for the Command) during a March away
from a threat, if they can; if they can Entreat only after Moving, they
do that. As with Devastate, they Entreat before a Battle Command,
or after Rally, Raid, or other March.
• They Entreat first to replace (not just remove) any Aedui, then
Belgic, then Germanic Allies possible with Arverni Allies.
• Then, they replace Auxilia where possible, then Aedui Warbands
with Arverni Warbands.
• Then, (once no Arverni Warbands are Available) they remove
Auxilia then Aedui Warbands. Finally. they remove (Subdue)
Allies of player Factions (in the unlikely case that they had no
Arverni Allies Available to replace them).
• If no such Entreat is possible (or if the Arverni Marched into or
out of Britannia, 4.1.3), they add no Special Ability.
NOTE: In the rare case that Entreat prevents Battle by removing
a lone target piece, instead March and Entreat per above.
8.7.2 Event? If the Battle-or-March condition above is not met—or
if no such Battle or March was possible—the Arverni might play
the Event.
• If the Arverni have no option to play the Event (because they are
2nd Eligible, and the 1st Eligible Faction executed the Event or a
Command only, 2.3.4), proceed to 8.7.3 below to consider whether
the Arverni will Rally.
• If they do have that option, check whether the Event
would be Ineffective, would add a Capability during
the game’s final year, or is listed as “No Arverni”
(8.1.1; the Arverni symbol on the card has swords,
8.2.1)—if any apply, proceed to 8.7.3 Rally.
• If none of the above applies, check whether the Event
is listed as “Auto 1-4” (the Arverni symbol on the card
would have a Carnyx battle trumpet, 8.2.1). If not,
roll a die. If so, or if the die roll is a 1-4, the Arverni
execute the Event per 8.2. If the die roll was a 5 or 6,
instead proceed to 8.7.3.
NOTE: If the Arverni symbol on that card has laurels,
see Arverni on the Event Instructions sheet (8.2.1).
Also, any Non-player Arverni Event Instructions may
render the Event Ineffective or “No Arverni”; if so,
proceed to 8.7.3.
8.7.3 Rally? If the Arverni did not Battle, March, nor play the Event,
they Rally if they have fewer than nine Warbands on the map, or
if Rallying (alone, without any Entreat) would place at least two
Citadels and/or Allies total, or at least six pieces.
• First, replace any Allies in Cities with Citadels.
• Then, place all Allies possible.
• Finally, place the most Warbands possible.
IF NONE: If the Arverni have fewer than nine Warbands but were
unable to Rally any pieces, they instead March per 8.7.4.
DEVASTATE OR ENTREAT: After Rallying, the Arverni Devastate
or Entreat per 8.7.1.
8.7.4 March to Spread? If no other conditions have yet been met,
the Arverni might March to spread their ability to gain Allies. They
do so if they have fewer than six Allies and Citadels total on the
map, or if they have at least six Warbands in Available. If so (and
it is not Frost, 2.3.8), the Arverni March from the fewest Regions
they can and still achieve the following (if with Vercingetorix,
avoiding Harassment per 8.7.1), leaving at least one Warband and
any Warbands needed to keep any Arverni Control.
• First, add one Hidden Arverni to each Region possible that
currently has no Hidden Arverni (without removing the last from
any origin).
• Then, move the Arverni Leader with all Warbands from his
Region to take Arverni Control of one Region with Roman or
Aedui Control. Choose the Region that is within a distance of one
Region from the most Regions possible that have Arverni pieces.
This destination may not be Bibracte (the Aedui Home Region).
IF NONE: If the Arverni cannot so March, they instead Raid per
8.7.5 below.
DEVASTATE OR ENTREAT: After Marching to spread, Arverni
Devastate or Entreat per 8.7.1.
8.7.5 Raid? If none of the above conditions were yet met, the
Arverni either Raid to replenish Resources or March to mass their
army, especially against the Legions. If Arverni have fewer than
four Resources, roll a die and on a roll of 1-4, they attempt to Raid.
If Raiding per below would gain them at least two Resources total,
they Raid wherever they can, in the following order.
• First, Raid to take Resources from Romans, then Aedui, then
Belgae, (whether player or Non-player) then in non-Devastated
Regions from no Faction.
IF NONE: If the Arverni have fewer than four Resources but cannot
gain enough Resources per above, they Pass.
DEVASTATE OR ENTREAT: After Raiding, Arverni Devastate or
Entreat per 8.7.1.
8.7.6 March to Mass? If no other Command or Event conditions
were met (including if the Arverni have at least four Resources, or
have fewer Resources but rolled a 5 or 6), the Arverni try to March to
mass a larger army around their Leader and approach the Romans in
the field. The Arverni Leader Marches, along with as many Arverni
Warbands as can reach his destination while achieving the following
(avoiding Harassment per 8.7.1).
• Add Arverni Control to one Region that does not yet have it and
contains at least one Legion. Select a Region with Caesar only if
only the Arverni will end the move with more than twice as many
mobile pieces (Warbands plus Vercingetorix) there as the Romans
(Legions plus Auxilia plus Caesar).
• If the above is not possible, instead move the Arverni Leader and
all Warbands possible to gather the largest number of Arverni
pieces possible into one Region that is adjacent to at least one
Legion. In this case, leave one Arverni Warband behind in each
origin Region.
IF NONE: If the Arverni cannot so March (for example, because of
Frost, 2.3.8, or because their Leader is not on the map), they instead
Raid per 8.7.5 above.
DEVASTATE OR ENTREAT: After Marching to mass, Arverni
Devastate or Entreat per 8.7.1.
8.7.7 Quarters. During the Quarters Phase (6.3.2), the Non-player
Arverni first leave Devastated Regions where they have no Ally or
Citadel for adjacent Regions that they Control, if they can. They
then (or thereby) move their Leader and/or one group of Warbands,
so as to join the Leader with the largest group of Arverni Warbands
able (if any) and, within that, to get or keep the Leader within one
Region of the most Regions with Arverni Forces able. They leave
behind at least one Warband and up to those needed to retain any
Arverni Control.
8.7.8 Vercingetorix’s Elite. If the shaded version of the Vercin-
getorix’s Elite Event is in effect, Non-player Arverni take Battle
Losses first by rolling against their Warbands that take Losses as
Legions, if they can.
8.8 Non-Player Roman Actions
This subsection governs actions by the Roman Faction
when a Non-player, as shown on the “Non-Player Roman”
flowchart sheet.
8.8.1 Battle or March under Threat? Eligible Non-player Romans
check whether they should fight or flee from threats to Caesar or to
Legions, or should subdue enemy allies. If Caesar or any Legion is
in a Region where any Gaul (including Aedui) or Germans have an
Ally, a Citadel, a Leader, or Control, or a Region where an immedi-
ate enemy Attack in Battle or Rampage (with any relevant Special
Abilities or Capabilities) against the Romans would force a Loss roll
against a Legion or against Caesar (3.3.4, 4.5.2), the Romans might
Battle there (maybe with Besiege). They do so only in such Regions
where that Defender would inflict less than half the Losses (die rolls
or removals) on the Romans as the Romans would inflict, and no
Losses at all against Caesar, presuming all Defender Loss rolls result
in Defender removals (the best possible case for the Roman Attack),
and taking into account any Special Ability, Capabilities, and so on:
• First, check whether Caesar meets the initial Battle-or-March
condition above (he is with the listed enemy pieces, enemy
Control, or a potent enough enemy to threaten a Legion Loss or his
own person). If he does but nevertheless will not Battle (because
he could not guarantee enough enemy Losses, or would suffer a
Loss himself), the Romans do not Battle at all, but instead March
per below.
• Next, check whether any Battle Regions will include Besiege at
the outset of the Battles. (If not, Scout may follow; see the relevant
sections below.)
• The Romans attack enemies who have—within the Regions
triggering the Battle Command—first, any Leaders; within that,
the most Warbands; then players first; then, most Allies plus
Citadels; finally, highest victory margins (7.3).
IF NONE OR IF ENEMY AT VICTORY: If the condition above
caused the possibility of Battle, but no Battle occurred—or if the
condition did not apply but an enemy Faction currently has a victory
margin of 0 or better (7.3) while Caesar is in a Region with at least
two Legions and at least four Auxilia—the Romans instead March
(from a maximum of three origin Regions) as follows:
• The Romans will March out with their Leader; with as many
Legions as able; and with at least one Auxilia per origin (if any
there), plus with the most Auxilia there that are able to leave
without Roman Control or adding enemy Control (not already
caused by departure of other Roman pieces).
• First, the Romans will March out of one Region that met the
“Battle or March under Threat” condition above (Caesar or
a Legion is with an enemy Ally, Citadel, Leader, Control, or
threatened Loss).
• Then, they will March out of a second such Region (if any)—but
only if that second Region will not be the destination of the Roman
group departing the first origin Region above (so check per below
where that group will be going).
• Finally, they also will March out of one Region (first with their
Leader, then with the most Legions not yet Marching) that is free
of enemy Allies and Citadels.
The above Roman Forces March to two Regions, each of which has
an enemy Ally or Citadel; however, if just six or fewer Legions are
on map and it is possible for all on-map Legions and the Roman
Leader (if on map) to reach a single such destination, they do so
(March to just one Region). The Romans choose their destination
enemy Allies or Citadels as follows, within the Harassment restric-
tions noted below.
• First, to Allies or Citadels of enemies with a victory margin of 0 or
higher (7.3)—if tied, players before Non-players, then randomly.
• Then, if the above does not apply, roll a die: on a roll of 1 or
2, March to Germanic Allies—but only if there are at least two
Germanic Allies total on the map.
• Or—if the roll is a 3 or 4—March to the Allies or Citadels of any
players before those of other Factions.
• If neither of the above applies, including on a roll of 5 or 6, March
first to Allies or Citadels of whichever enemies have most Allies
plus Citadels on the map.
• Within any of the above priorities, March first to Regions
where the most damaging possible enemy Battle (including any
applicable Special Ability or Capability) immediately after that
March would force the fewest Losses on the Romans; then where
the most of that enemy’s Allies and Citadels; then so as to end in
a Region with a Supply Line (3.2.1); then where the route results
in the least possible Harassment.
• If Marching to two Regions, move Forces so as to end with more
mobile Romans by each type (Leader, Legions, and Auxilia) in
the first destination Region than in the second destination, to the
degree possible (such as within any need to use Caesar to enable
Forces to reach priority destinations per all the above).
ROMAN MARCH AND HARASSMENT: Romans March by routes
that will inflict the fewest possible Harassment Losses on them
(3.2.4, including because a player Faction agrees that its Warbands
will not Harass that March, 1.5.2), and only to Regions that they
can reach suffering no more than one Loss per group per destination
Region and 0 on a Legion or piece moving alone. (See also first
Scout section below.)
IF NONE: If no such Battle or March can occur, proceed instead to
8.8.4 below to Recruit.
BESIEGE: If the Romans are Battling per above, they Besiege at the
start of Battle in any Region where they can Besiege and doing so is
needed to ensure removal of an enemy Ally, and/or of a Citadel that
might suffer fewer than three Loss rolls in that Battle.
• If the Romans would Besiege in any Battle Region per the above,
they also do so in each other Battle possible.
• If no such Besiege is possible, the Romans instead Scout after
Battle, per below.
SCOUT OUT HARASSING WARBANDS: If the Romans Marched,
they Scout as needed and as able to diminish Harassment so as to
reach March destinations (by Revealing Hidden Warbands in inter-
vening Regions). If so, they continue to Scout with other Auxilia as
detailed below (instead of Building).
BUILD: If the Romans Marched without Scouting against Harass-
ment (or Seized, 8.8.5), they afterwards Build, spending no more
Resources once Roman Resources drop below six (and not where
any Seize occurred). (If the Romans are Recruiting, they Build before
executing the Recruit, 8.8.4).
• First, place all Forts possible, first wherever Arverni, Belgae, or
Germans have Warbands.
• Then, Subdue all Allies possible—first any Allies of Gallic
Factions that have the highest victory margins (7.3); if tied, the
Allies of players before others.
• Finally, place all Roman Allies possible.
• If no Build occurred, instead Scout per below.
SCOUT: If the Romans did not Besiege or Build, they
Scout if doing so would have any effect (Auxilia would
move, or any Warbands would be Revealed or have a
Scouted marker placed on them, 4.2.2). Move Auxilia
only so as to keep Roman Control, add no enemy Control, and lose
no Supply Line from any Region that has Roman pieces.
• First, move Auxilia to end with at least four Auxilia in Caesar’s
Region (and keep at least four there for all of this Scout).
• Next, move Auxilia to adjacent Regions so as to add guaranteed
Supply Lines (by removing Arverni, Belgae, player Aedui, or
Germanic Control) to the most Regions possible that already have
Roman pieces.
• Then, move pieces to join Auxilia not yet with Legions to the
most Legions that they can reach in equal number by Region
(and without diminishing the number of Regions with guaranteed
Supply Lines per the above).
• Scout against as many Warbands as able, flipping Hidden
Warbands to Revealed (and placing markers on them) before
placing markers on already Revealed Warbands. If it is Frost
(2.3.8), Scout against Germanic Warbands before any others.
• If no such Scout is possible (or if the Romans Marched into or
out of Britannia, 4.1.3), the Romans add no Special Ability.
8.8.2 Event? If the initial Battle-or-March condition above is not
met, the Romans might play the Event.
• If the Romans have no option to play the Event (because they
are 2nd Eligible, and the 1st Eligible Faction executed the Event
or a Command only, 2.3.4), proceed to 8.8.3 below to consider
whether the Romans will March.
• If they do have that option, check whether the Event would be
Ineffective, would add a Capability during the game’s final year,
or is listed as “No Romans” (8.1.1)—if any apply, proceed to
8.8.3 March.
• If none of the above applies, the Romans execute the Event
per 8.2. NOTE: See the Non-player Roman Event Instructions
(8.2.1)—they may render the Event Ineffective or “No Romans”;
if so, proceed to 8.8.3.
NOTE: Check the Roman symbol on the
Event card—gray swords mean that the
Event is “No Romans”, gray laurels that it
has special Instructions for Non-player
Romans (8.2.1).
8.8.3 March? If the Romans checked for the possibility of execut-
ing the Event but did not play it, they may March after all. Check
the number of Auxilia on the Romans’ Available Forces display—if
eight or fewer, the Romans March per 8.8.1 above, including Build
or Scout.
8.8.4 Recruit? If the Romans have more than eight Auxilia Avail-
able, they Recruit if doing so enables them to place at least two
Roman Allies or at least six Roman pieces (Allies plus Auxiliaries)
total, as follows (if possible, Building per 8.8.1 before Recruiting).
• First, place all Romans Allies possible, first in Regions that are
part of a Supply Line (3.2.1, in order to save Resources).
• Then, place all Auxilia possible, again first in Regions that are
part of a Supply Line.
• If Recruit would not place enough pieces, instead Seize per below.
BUILD OR SCOUT: Before Recruiting, the Romans Build per 8.8.1;
or—if no such Build is possible—Scout per 8.8.1.
8.8.5 Seize? If the Romans executed none of the above Commands
or an Event, they Seize—but only where no Harassment Losses
will occur.
• First, the Romans Disperse as manyTribes as they can
except the Helvii (in Provincia)—starting with
those in Regions that have any players’ pieces;
within that, first in Belgica (then elsewhere).
• Then, the Romans Seize without Dispersing only
so as to add all further Resources possible (without suffering any
Harassment).
BUILD OR SCOUT: After Seizing, the Romans Build or—if not
possible—Scout, per 8.8.1.
IF NONE: If the Romans executed no such Seize, other Command,
or Event, they Pass.
8.8.6 Resources, Supply Lines, Retreat. Non-player Romans do
not voluntarily transfer Resources (1.5.2). They allow other Fac-
tions’ Retreat, Supply Lines (3.2.1), and Quarters (6.3) in Roman-
Controlled Regions only for Non-player Aedui. (For Non-player
Roman Retreat from Battle, see 8.4.2.)
8.8.7 Quarters. During the Quarters Phase (6.3.3), the Non-player
Romans keep one Auxilia at each Fort and Roman Ally. The Ro-
man Leader, all Legions, and all other Auxilia that are able to reach
Provincia—including by first moving to an adjacent Supply Line
Region—move to Provincia. The Romans then pay Resources for
all pieces necessary to avoid removal rolls, starting with those at
Roman Allies, then those where no Devastation, finally those at
Devastation last.
8.8.8 Diviciacus. While the unshaded Capability Diviciacus is in
effect, the Non-player Romans agree to have Auxilia act as Aedui
Warbands during Aedui Commands only while the Aedui are not
exceeding their victory threshold (7.2) and never where Aedui are
Battling or Raiding Romans. During their own Commands, Non-
player Romans use Aedui Warbands as Auxilia to the maximum
degree that Aedui agree (including removing Aedui instead of
Auxilia), except that they never place Aedui Warbands by Recruit.
They do not agree to use of Auxilia during Aedui defense in Battle.
(They do during Roman defense.)
8.9 1-Player Victory
The player in a 1-player game never wins before the final Winter.
To succeed, the player must both avoid any Non-player exceeding
its victory threshold during any Victory Phase (which would end
the game then, 7.1-7.3) and have the highest victory margin upon
the final Victory Phase.
1-Player Easy Option: Player Faction can win by exceeding its
threshold any Victory Phase.
1-Player Difficult Option: Player Faction loses at any Victory
Phase in which any Non-player has a higher victory margin.
NON-PLAYER VICTORY: Unless the player wins, the Non-player
with the highest margin (ties per 7.1) takes Gaul:
• If Belgae—Lugdunensis Limit. Rome with difficulty incorporates
Celtica into its empire, but reconsiders the wisdom of expansion
into the inhospitable northern wilderness, leaving Belgica free of
that yoke.
• If Aedui—Client State. The Romans remain, but they influence
Gaul only through their powerful agent, the Aedui Confederation,
which uses its friendship with the Senate and control of Roman
trade to rule all rival tribes.
• If Arverni—Imperium Rebuff. As the Romans withdraw to lick
their wounds and sort out their civil affairs, the victorious Arverni
govern a Gaul that is finally unified under the Celts ...at least for
a time.
• If Romans—Subject Gaul. Rome divides all Gaul into imperial
Roman provinces, which Romanize and remain so for five
centuries.
PLAYER VICTORY: If the player does survive to the final Winter
and has the highest victory margin, subtract the highest Non-player
margin from the player’s to find the degree of success:
• 1 or 2—In Gallia Bella! Gaul remains restive for another
generation, with Rome one of several potent factions, each of
which retains the arms to defend its particular interests.
• 3 or More, Player as Roman—Imperator! Caesar and his
successors cement their dominance as first citizens of Rome, and
Gallia’s position firmly within the Roman orbit.
• 3 or More, Player as Gaul—Galli ipsi gubernandi sunt! Out of
Caesar’s adventure, a single Gallic confederation emerges as the
strongest and exploits the exhaustion of the others to rule Gaul,
as the Romans turn inward, for now.
