4.2 Roman Special Abilities
The Romans may choose from Build, Scout, or Besiege
Special Abilities.
4.2.1 Build. Building constructs forts or public works to subdue or
ally with tribes under Roman control. It may accompany Recruit,
March, or Seize Commands (3.2.1-.3), not Battle (but see restric-
tion below on Seize Regions). Select Regions for Build that both:
• Have a Roman Ally in them already, or are part of a Supply Line
to Cisalpina (3.2.1) and have any Roman piece in it.
• Are within one Region of Caesar (the same Region as Caesar is
in, or adjacent to him) or is the Region that the Roman Successor
Leader (1.4) is in.
PROCEDURE: The Romans select Regions desired for Build and
Supply Lines. Factions declare whether or not they agree to have the
Supply Line include Regions they Control. In each Build Region,
the Romans do one or both:
• Place a Fort (if none already there, 1.4, 1.4.2).
• And/or, if the Region is now under Roman Control (1.6, including
due to the new Fort) and if that Region is not selected for a Seize
that accompanying Command (3.2.3, 4.1.1), either Subdue
(remove) any one Gallic or Germanic Allied Tribe there (a disc,
not a Citadel), or place a Roman Ally at an already Subdued Tribe
there (not at Aedui [Bibracte], Arverni [Gergovia], or Suebi, 1.4.2)
The Romans must pay two Resources for each Fort and each Ally
placed or removed above.
PLAY NOTE: A Roman tactic is to March into an enemy’s Region
and immediately Build a Fort. Doing so requires enough Forces
to cancel enemy Control in order to establish a Supply Line, or
already having a Roman Ally there.
4.2.2 Scout. Scouting can move Auxilia, Reveal Hidden
Warbands, and keep them Revealed longer. It may ac-
company any type of Command. Select any Regions with
Auxilia (even if no Leader nearby).
PROCEDURE: Move Auxilia as desired from any Regions to
adjacent Regions, but not into or out of Britannia (Revealed stay
Revealed, Hidden stay Hidden; no piece may move more than once).
Then, in any Regions desired that are within one Region of Caesar
or with his Successor in it, each Hidden Auxilia piece may flip to
Revealed in order to Reveal up to two Warbands (flip from Hidden
to Revealed, or leave Revealed, 1.4.3) in that Region and place
Scouted markers on them (if none already).
NOTE: Scout movement may combine with accompanying March
movement (3.2.2).
SCOUTED: Scouted markers delay Revealed Warbands flipping
back to Hidden: whenever an action (such as March, 3.3.2, 3.4.2)
or an Event (5.0) would flip a Scouted Warband to Hidden, instead
remove the Scouted marker and keep the Warband Revealed.
(Scouted markers are removed and all Warbands go Hidden at the
end of Winter, 6.6.)
NOTE: Put a single Scouted marker on each group of Scouted
Warbands of the same Faction in a Region.
4.2.3 Besiege. Besieging helps subdue enemy tribes, especially
Citadels. It may only accompany Battle (3.2.4). Once announced,
it may modify any Battle Regions during that Command that both
have at least one Legion and a Defender who has a Citadel or Allied
Tribe. NOTE: Besiege does not have a Special Ability’s usual need
of a nearby Leader (4.1.2).
PROCEDURE: In those Battles, before and in addition to any Losses
(even 0 Losses) inflicted on the Defender, the (Roman) Attacker
may automatically remove (Subdue) a Defending Citadel or Allied
Tribe (no roll, Attacker’s choice which), regardless of whether or
not the Defender is Retreating. NOTE: A Defender with a Citadel
still suffers only half Losses that Battle, even after the Citadel is
removed (3.2.4).
4.3 Arverni Special Abilities
The Arverni choose from Entreat, Devastate, or Ambush
Special Abilities.
4.3.1 Entreat. Entreaties sponsor betrayals of allegiance
from the enemy to the Arverni. They may accompany any type of
Command. Select Regions that have a Hidden Arverni Warband, and
are either within one Region of Vercingetorix or the same Region
as his Successor.
PROCEDURE: Pay one Resource per Region selected to replace
either any one non-Arverni Warband or Auxilia there or—only if
the Region is already Arverni Controlled—one Aedui, Belgic, or
Germanic Allied Tribe there (not a Citadel, Roman Ally, or Subdued
Tribe) with their Arverni counterparts (one Arverni Warband for
each enemy Warband or Auxilia, one Allied Tribe per enemy Allied
Tribe). If the specified Arverni piece is not available or could not
stack (such as at Aedui [Bibracte] or Suebi), remove rather than
replace the target piece (1.4.1, 1.4.2).
4.3.2 Devastate. Devastation starves armies and hinders
many actions. It may accompany any Commands. Select
any Arverni-Controlled Regions that either are within
one Region of Vercingetorix or have his Successor in it.
PROCEDURE: In each Region, the Arverni remove one in four of
their Warbands there, and each other Faction removes one in three
of its total number of Warbands, Auxilia, and Legions there (round
down; owners choose which pieces among candidates; Legions to
Fallen). Place a Devastated marker in each selected Region that
does not already have one. A Region may have only one Devastated
marker.
NOTE: Devastated markers block Recruit (3.2.1) and Rally by all
except Vercingetorix (Arverni Leader, 3.3.1), double the Resource
costs of many Commands (3.2.2,-.4; 3.3.1,-.2,-.4), halt Roman
and Vercingetorix March (3.2.2, 3.3.2), block Roman Seizure of
Resources (3.2.3), hinder Raid (3.3.3), and make it harder for
Forces to Quarter in a Region over Winter (6.3).
4.3.3 Ambush. Ambush improves the attacker’s prospects in battles
about to be fought. It may only accompany Battle. Once announced,
it may modify any Battle Regions during that Command that both
begin with more Hidden Arverni than Hidden Defenders and occur
either within one Region of Vercingetorix or in the same Region as
his Successor.
PROCEDURE: Battles modified by Ambush alter their procedure
(3.2.4, 3.3.4, 3.4.4) thus—
• The Defender may not Retreat (but may use any Fort or Citadel
normally).
• The Defender must remove a piece for each Loss suffered,
including Leader, Legion, Citadel, or Fort without first rolling
a 1-3. EXCEPTION: Romans Defending in the same Region as
Caesar on a die roll of 4, 5, or 6 retain the usual ability to absorb
Losses by rolling a die and removing only on 1-3.
• There is no Counterattack (Attacker takes no Losses) except if
Caesar rolled a 4-6 above.
4.4 Aedui Special Abilities
The Aedui choose from Trade, Suborn, or Ambush Spe-
cial Abilities.
4.4.1 Trade. Trade garners Aedui Resources, represent-
ing profit from the distribution of imported Roman goods. It may
accompany any type of Command. It occurs in Regions that are part
of any Supply Lines to Cisalpina (3.2.1).
PROCEDURE: Player Factions declare whether or not they agree to
Supply Lines in Regions they Control; the Romans declare regardless
of whether they Control any relevant Regions. (The Aedui may call
off the Trade if unhappy with any disagreement, 1.5.2.) The Aedui
then receive +1 Resource—or, if the Romans agreed above, +2
Resources—for each of the following within Supply Lines:
• Each Aedui Allied Tribe and Aedui Citadel.
• Where Aedui Control only—each Subdued Tribe and, only if the
Romans agreed above, each Roman Allied Tribe.
PLAY NOTE: The Aedui can offer some of the added Resources
to gain agreement.
4.4.2 Suborn. Suborning buys allegiance to the Aedui or others,
greater or less subservience to Rome, or neutrality. It may accompany
Rally, March, or Raid and occur in any one Region with a Hidden
Aedui Warband.
PROCEDURE: Pay two Aedui Resources per Ally and one Aedui
Resource per Warband or Auxilia to remove and/or place a total of
up to three such pieces in the Suborn Region (in any combination).
A maximum of one of the three pieces removed or placed in the
Region may be an Allied Tribe (no Citadels). Any Faction’s pieces
may be involved. Place Allies only at Subdued Tribes (place only
Aedui at Aedui [Bibracte], only Arverni at Arverni [Gergovia], only
Germanic at Suebi, 1.4.2).
NOTES: Control is not needed to Suborn Allies. The Convicto-
litavis Capability (5.3) would enable the Aedui to Suborn a total
of six pieces (at most two Allies), three in each of two Regions.
4.4.3 Ambush. Aedui Ambush works the same as Arverni Ambush
(4.3.3) except using Aedui instead of Arverni pieces. No Leader is
required, but the Aedui may only Ambush in a maximum of one
Region per Battle Command.
4.5 Belgic Special Abilities
The Belgae choose from Enlist, Rampage, or Ambush
Special Abilities.
4.5.1 Enlist. Enlist invites help from Germanic kinsmen. It may
accompany any Command and affect Regions in or adjacent to Ger-
mania or Regions that are further from Germania but have Germanic
pieces in them. The affected Regions also must be within one Region
of Ambiorix or have the Belgic Successor in it.
PROCEDURE: Choose one of two options below.
• Either, in the affected Regions
desired, the accompanying
B e l g i c C o m m a n d t r e a t s
Germanic Warbands (black) as if they were Belgic Warbands
(yellow), including for placing new Warbands by Rally, Marching
groups out of an affected Region into adjacent Regions (whether
the destination is affected by Enlist or not), flipping Marching
Warbands to Hidden, resolving Raid or Battle, or determining
Belgic Control. Command costs and other Command restrictions
and procedures apply normally. The Belgae may not voluntarily
remove the Germanic Warbands, however (1.4.1). As soon as
execution of the current Belgic Command is completed, so is
Enlist, and all Germanic Warbands again are treated as Germanic
(adjust Control).
• Or, execute one free Limited Command with Germanic pieces
(per 3.4, making choices as if a Germanic player; no March upon
Frost, 2.3.8). The Region need not be one selected for the Belgic
Command, but must be in the usual vicinity of the Belgic Leader
for a Special Ability. Marching Germans must begin in but need
not stay within the affected Regions; they may enter or leave
Britannia. Battling Germans must be able to Ambush (3.4.4), and
Ambush whenever they Battle.
4.5.2 Rampage. Rampaging demonstrates Belgic ferocity, in order
to frighten enemy Forces out of one or more Regions and sometimes
to compel their surrender. It may accompany Rally, Raid, or Battle.
It may occur in any Regions both with Hidden Belgic Warbands
present and either within one Region of Ambiorix or with the Belgic
Successor present.
PROCEDURE: In each Rampage Region, a Region at a time—
• Select one target Roman or Gallic Faction (not Germanic) that
has neither a Leader, nor a Citadel, nor a Fort in the Region.
• That target Faction must either remove or Retreat one of its
Warbands, Auxilia, and/or Legions (no roll) per Hidden Belgic
Warband in the Region that the Belgae flip to Revealed. Removed
Legions go to Fallen (1.4.1).
• Retreat per the Battle procedure (3.2.4 & 3.3.4)—into one adjacent
Region where the targeted Faction or a Faction that agrees at that
moment has Control (not No Control nor Germanic Control).
4.5.3 Ambush. Belgic Ambush works like Arverni Ambush (4.3.3),
but uses Belgic instead of Arverni pieces (including Ambiorix instead
of Vercingetorix), and Caesar must roll a 5 or 6 for Romans to roll
for Losses and Counterattack.
