1.0 INTRODUCTION
Falling Sky is a board game about the latter part of the Roman
conquest of Gaul, when numerous tribes rose in revolt. It adapts
GMT Games’ “COIN Series” system about modern insurgencies to
depict the political, military, and economic affairs of ancient Gaul.
An Ariovistus expansion to Falling Sky, sold separately, adds the
early years of the Gallic War.
In Falling Sky, one to four players each take the roles of one or more
Factions in Gaul: the Roman Republic seeking to secure Julius Cae-
sar’s recent conquests; an anti-Roman confederation led by the Celtic
Arverni tribe and its young king Vercingetorix; its Celtic rival, the
generally pro-Roman Aedui confederation; and fierce Belgic tribes
of the north led by the chieftain Ambiorix. Germanic warbands from
across the Rhine may intervene, sometimes in cooperation with a
Faction, sometimes alone.
Issuing commands and exploiting their Factions’ special abilities
and various events, players build and maneuver forces to influence
or control the tribes of Gaul, extract resources, and achieve their
Factions’ aims. Cards regulate turn order, events, and victory checks.
The game’s most important functions are summarized on several
aid sheets. This Second Edition rule book explains (on pages 28-34)
how to set up the scenarios, and also lists key terms in an index near
the end (pages 35-36). Players seeking gradual instruction should
start with the tutorial in the Playbook.
Second Edition: This edition of Falling Sky updates five Event
cards, marked “2nd Ed”, and the Non-player rules, section 8.
1.1 General Course of Play
In Falling Sky, cards are played from the deck one at time, with
one card ahead revealed to all players. Each Event card shows the
order in which the Factions become Eligible to choose either that
Event or from a menu of actions. Executing an Event or Command
renders that Faction Ineligible to do so on the next card. Winter
cards mixed in trigger periodic victory checks and other activities.
1.2 Components
A complete set of Second Edition Falling Sky includes:
• A 17" x 22" mounted board (1.3).
• A deck of 77 playing cards (5.0).
• 200 wooden Forces pieces, cylinders, and pawns (1.4, 1.8, 2.2,
3.1.1).
• A sheet of markers.
• Five heavy-cardboard Available Forces displays (1.4.1).
• Four Faction player aid foldouts (3.0, 4.0, 7.0).
• Two Sequence of Play and Germanic Tribes sheets (2.0, 3.4,
6.0, 6.2).
• One Battle Procedure (3.2.4) and Non-Player Guidelines/
Instructions foldout (8.1-8.4).
• Two Second Edition Non-Player flowchart foldouts (8.5-8.8).
• Four 6-sided dice—red, green, blue, yellow.
• A background playbook.
• This Second Edition rule book.
1.3 The Map
The game board shows a map of Gaul and environs, with several
tracks around the edge.
1.3.1 Regions. Borders delineate Regions of the map, with certain
Regions grouped as Celtica, Belgica, or Germania. Each Region is
home to one or more Tribes, some of which have Cities (1.3.3). Each
Region includes a Control marker holding box that also shows the
Region’s Control Value for Belgic Victory (7.2).
1.3.2 Tribes. Colored circles within the Regions show named Tribes
whose status—Subdued, Allied to a Faction, or Dispersed (1.4.2,
4.2.3)—influences victory (7.0). NOTE: There are 30 such Tribes,
listed alphabetically on the back of the Playbook.
1.3.3 Cities. Gray diamonds around some Tribe
circles show that those Tribes have Cities (named
in capital letters) that can be fortified into Cita-
dels. (1.4.2, 3.3.1)
1.3.4 Britannia. The Britannia Region is treated as adjacent to the
three coastal Regions of Gaul across from it—as shown by white
arrows—for all purposes except for restrictions in Marching (3.2.2,
3.3.2, 4.1.3) or Scouting (4.2.2) across it.
1.3.5 Rhenus. Germania’s border with Gaul is a river that halts
March (3.2.2, 3.3.2). NOTE: The Morini Region borders Germania
across the Rhenus.
1.3.6 Overflow Box. The board features a
holding box for the occasional case of a
Region becoming too crowded with
pieces. Place some or all of the pieces in
the Overflow box and the “Overflow”
marker into their Region.
1.4 Forces
Wooden pieces represent the Factions’ Leaders (tall cylinders, if
any), Roman Legions (cubes), Roman Auxilia or Gallic or Germanic
Warbands (hexagonal cylinders), Allied Tribes (also called “Allies”,
discs), and Roman Forts and Gallic Citadels (squares and diamonds).
1.4.1 Available Forces, Placement, and Removal. Each Faction
(1.5) has a separate Available Forces display showing an inventory
of Forces, including spaces for its Allied Tribes and Citadels. These
Force pools limit the number of pieces that a Faction may have in
play. Keep a Faction’s Forces not on the map on its Available Forces
display, within easy view of all players. Place Allies and Citadels in
the highest-numbered empty spaces—including Ally discs in any
empty Citadel spaces—revealing the number of them that are on the
map, in order to help track Resource earnings (6.4) and victory (7.0).
• Placement: Pieces other than Legions may only be placed from or
replaced with those on the Available Forces displays—ignore any
instructions to place pieces if the appropriate type is not Available
(a piece to be replaced by a piece that is not Available is simply
removed).
• Removal: When removing pieces other than Legions from the
map, put them on their Available Forces display.
• Legions: Legions not on the map start out on the Legions track,
on the lowest rows, up to four per row. Unless otherwise specified,
place Legions onto the map from the Legions track (not from the
Fallen Legions box) via Event (5.0) or the Senate Phase (6.5),
and Legions removed from a Region into the Fallen Legions box.
Some Events (5.0) and voluntary removal (below) instead remove
Legions to the Legions track. Legions move from the Fallen box
to the Legions track during the Winter (6.5.2, 6.6).
• Voluntary Removal: A player Faction while executing a
Command or Event by the Sequence of Play (2.3.4, 3.0, 5.0)
may remove its own pieces from the map to Available, or to the
Legions Track if a Legion (but see permanent Fort, 1.4.2; Belgic
Enlist, 4.5.1). Also, a Faction at such time may replace any of its
Citadels with its Allied Tribes (discs).
PLAY NOTE: Voluntary removal allows placement into a Region
when all Available pieces are already elsewhere on the map.
1.4.2 Stacking. Any number of Forces may occupy a Region, except:
• Allied Tribes may occupy only Tribe circles, one per circle.
• Citadels may occupy only City diamonds, one per diamond, taking
the place of any Allied Tribe there.
• Only one Roman Fort may be in each Region.
Provincia always has one Roman Fort piece in it. Set up and always
keep one of the wooden Fort pieces in the red square space there.
That piece cannot be removed.
• No Allies or Citadels may occupy a Dispersed Tribe’s circle (1.7,
3.2.3).
• A few Tribe circles and Cities may hold only certain Allies or
Citadels—the Aedui Tribe circle/Bibracte City may hold only
an Aedui Allied Tribe/Aedui Citadel (blue); the Arverni circle/
Gergovia may hold only an Arverni Ally/Citadel (green); and the
two Suebi circles may hold only Germanic Allies (black).
• Cisalpina and Aquitania are non-playable areas. They are not
Regions and may hold no pieces (except by Event, 5.1.1).
1.4.3 Flipping. Warbands and Auxilia are either Hid-
den—symbol end down—or Revealed—symbol end
up, affecting their abilities. Actions, Events, and the
Spring Phase (6.6) flip them from one to the other state. All other
pieces are always Revealed, not Hidden. Revealed Warbands can
be marked Scouted (4.2.2); whenever they are to be flipped to Hid-
den, remove the marker instead of flipping. Always set up and place
new Warbands and Auxilia Hidden (including if replacing a Revealed
or Scouted piece, 4.2.2).
• Leader pieces symbol end up are Caesar (red, Roman),
Vercingetorix (green, Arverni), or Ambiorix (yellow, Belgic),
symbol down that person’s Successor. A removed Leader piece
will return as a Successor that Winter (6.6).
NOTE: Hidden Auxilia help Scout (4.2.2), Harass Vercingeto-
rix’s March (3.3.2), and block enemy Ambush (4.3.3). Hidden
Warbands can Raid (3.3.3), Harass Roman March (3.2.2) and
Seize (3.2.3), Retreat from Roman Battle within a Region (3.2.4),
Ambush (4.3.3), Entreat (4.3.1), Suborn (4.4.2), and Rampage
(4.5.2).
1.5 Players & Factions
Falling Sky is playable by one to four players. Player Factions
are the Roman Republic (red), the Arverni Confederation (green),
the Aedui Confederation (blue), and the Belgic Tribes (“Belgae”,
yellow-orange). The game rules—and sometimes players—guide a
5th Faction, the Germanic Tribes (“Germans”, black).
• The Arverni, Aedui, and Belgic Factions collectively are also
called “Gallic” or “Gauls”.
PLAY NOTE: Romans and Arverni may require more intricate
play to achieve their potential and should go to more confident
players.
1.5.1 Spare Factions. With two or three players, the players run
leftover Factions:
• With three players, one player runs Arverni and Belgae or, if
preferred, Romans and Aedui.
• With two players, one player runs Arverni and Belgae, the other
Romans and Aedui.
A player running two Factions uses the lower victory margin of the
two (7.1-.3) and only causes play to end on a victory check (6.1) if
both Factions are meeting their conditions.
EXCEPTION: A player running both Arverni and Belgae in “The
Great Revolt” scenario uses the higher of those Factions’ victory
margins and ends play if one has met its condition (2.1).
Non-Player Option: If playing solitaire, or as an alternative to
the above with two or three players, use the Non-player rules in
section 8 to govern leftover Factions.
1.5.2 Negotiation. All negotiations are open. Players may make any
mutual arrangements within the rules, binding only as follows: once
a player agrees to something within the execution of a Command or
Event, or Quarters Phase, that agreement holds during that action.
A player failing to obtain agreement at the outset of an action may
cancel the action.
• A Faction may transfer Resources (1.8) to another during either’s
execution by the Sequence of Play (2.3.4) of a Command or
Event—a maximum of four Resources per such execution between
two Factions run by the same player (1.5.1).
• Factions may transfer any Resources to any non-German Factions
during the Quarters and Harvest Phases of the Winter Round (6.3-
6.4).
1.6 Control
Any Faction (including Germanic) that has more Forces (pieces, 1.4)
in a Region than all other Factions combined Controls that Region.
If no Faction does, the Region has No Control. Control affects a
number of Faction actions as well as Belgic victory (7.0). Place
and adjust Control markers in a Region’s Control box at setup and
as Commands (3.0), Special Abilities (4.0), Events (5.0), or Winter
(6.0) alter Control.
NOTE: Mark uncontrolled Regions with “No Control” markers,
or by leaving the Control box empty, showing “No Control”.
1.7 Subdued and Dispersed Tribes
As the map shows, an empty Tribe
circle (1.3.2) is Subdued: subservient
to Rome and not at war. Roman Seize
actions (3.2.3) can Disperse a Sub-
dued Tribe (place a marker on it),
blocking placement of Allies there (1.4.2) and negating its value for
Belgic Victory (1.3.1, 7.2).
Subdued and Dispersed Tribes, along with Roman Allies, add to
Roman victory (7.0).
1.8 Resources
At any moment, each Roman and Gallic Faction has
between 0 and 45 Resources that they use to pay for
Commands (3.0). Mark Resources along the 0-45 board
edge track with a short round wooden cylinder of the
Faction’s color (1.5). NOTE: The Germans do not track Resources.
1.9 Victory Markers
Use markers as follows to track various totals that affect Roman or
Gallic victory (7.0).
• Track Roman victory—the sum of Subdued,
Dispersed (1.7), and Roman Allied Tribes—on the
edge track with the red “Subdued Dispersed +
Allies” victory marker.
• Similarly track Belgic victory—the sum of Belgic
Controlled (1.6) Tribes plus Belgic Allies and
Citadels—on the edge track with the orange
“Control + Allies” victory marker.
• Track a part of Arverni victory—off-map Legions,
meaning those in the Fallen Legions box, plus on
the Legions track, plus removed by Event (1.4.1,
5.0, 6.5)—on the edge track with the green “Off-Map
Legions” marker. The other part of Arverni victory—
total Arverni Allied Tribes and Citadels—is shown by the highest
uncovered number on the Arverni Available Forces display.
• Track Aedui victory on the Aedui Available Forces
display with the “Other Most Allies” marker. Place
the marker at the number of Allied Tribes and
Citadels of whatever other (non-Aedui) Faction has
the most (including Romans or Germans).
Comparing the highest Aedui Ally number showing to the “Other”
number indicated will show how close the Aedui are to victory.

                                               
