5.0 EVENTS
Each Event bears a Faction Order (2.3), title, italicized flavor text,
and Event text. Flavor text adds historical interest; it has no effect
on play.
5.1 Executing Events
When a Faction executes an Event, it carries out the Event text
literally and in the order given (sometimes involving actions or deci-
sions by other Factions). Unless otherwise specified, the executing
Faction makes all selections allowed for in implementing the text,
such as which pieces are affected. Some Events with lasting effects
have markers as aids to play. NOTE: Instructions to place pieces,
unless otherwise specified (such as by “any”), mean the placing
Faction’s pieces.
Laurels (regards
Non-players, 8.2.1)
Italicized
Flavor Text
Capability
Indicator (5.3)
Shaded Text
(see Dual Use 5.2)
Event Text
Faction Order
Title
5.1.1 Events vs Rules. When executing Event text, follow normal
rules, such as restrictions and procedures for free actions granted
(5.4), unless otherwise specified. Where Event text contradicts rules,
the Event takes precedence, except that:
• Events never place pieces that are not Available (1.4.1); they
remove rather than replace if the replacement is not available.
NOTE: The executing Faction can remove own pieces to make
them Available (1.4.1).
• Events may not violate stacking (1.4.2) unless their text explicitly
changes stacking rules. NOTE: The only Events that do so are
Colony, Gallia Togata, and Gobannitio. Events remove rather
than replace pieces if the new piece would violate stacking.
• Events do not raise Resources above 45; any excess Resources
are lost (1.8).
• Instructions to Reveal or Hide pieces affect only Warbands and
Auxilia (1.4.3). Events that flip Scouted Warbands to Hidden
instead remove the Scouted marker (4.2.2).
• Events that shift the Senate when Firm (toward the opposite end)
instead flip the Senate marker (regardless of boxes to be shifted,
6.5.1) and that shift up from Uproar or down from Adulation
instead set it to Firm.
EXAMPLE: Event text that says “free March” allows March
even upon Frost (2.3.8).
NOTE: For help executing a particular Event, see the “tips” in
the Playbook Event Notes.
5.1.2 Dueling Events. If two Events contradict, the currently played
Event takes precedence.
5.1.3 Partial Execution. All of an executed Event’s text that can
be carried out (within any selections that the text allows, 5.1), must
be; if not all can be, carry out that which can.
5.1.4 Event Markers. A few Events with lasting effects note in
their text to place or flip reminder markers on the map. (See also
Capabilities, 5.3.)
5.2 Dual Use
Most Events have both shaded and unshaded Event text. The execut-
ing Faction may select either the unshaded or shaded text to carry
out (not both). While the shaded text often favors various Gauls, a
player may select either text option regardless of Faction.
DESIGN NOTE: Dual-use events represent opposed effects
of the same cause, alternative interpretations, or forks in the
historical road.
5.3 Capabilities
Events marked “CAPABILITY” have lasting
effects that either help or hurt one or more
Factions. When executing such text, put the
card near the most affected player and place a “Capability” marker
on its appropriate side (shaded or unshaded) onto the card. The
Event’s effects last for the rest of the game (unless altered by a
later Event, 5.1.2).
NOTE: “CAPABILITY” marked on the
boundary between unshaded and
shaded Dual-use text (5.2) means that both versions are Capa-
bilities.
5.4 Free Actions
Many Events allow the Executing or other Factions immediate
Commands or Special Abilities that interrupt the usual sequence and
are free: they cost no Resources and do not further affect Eligibility
(3.1.2, 2.3.1). Other aspects such as location requirements remain,
unless modified by Event text (5.1.1). Events granting an unspeci-
fied “Special Ability” may only select Besiege (4.2.3) and Ambush
(4.3.3) if an accompanying Battle Command (3.2.4, 3.3.4, 4.1.1) is
also occurring as part of the Event. Events stating “Ambush” alone
grant an inherent accompanying Battle Command.
EXAMPLE: Aedui free Rally (3.3.1) would cost 0 Resources and
not affect Aedui Eligibility but still could not occur in Devastated
Regions unless otherwise specified, such as by allowing “Rally in
any Region”. Aedui free Suborn (4.4.2) would allow placement
and/or removal of three pieces in one Region at 0 cost.
NOTE: Free March or Scout “in” a Region allows Forces there
to move out to other Regions (3.2.2, 4.2.2).
