7.0 VICTORY
Each Roman and Gallic Faction has unique victory conditions,
covered below and on the Faction aid sheets.
NOTE: The Germanic Faction does not track or achieve victory.
7.1 Ranking Wins and Breaking Ties
Whenever any Non-player Faction passes a victory check (7.2), all
players lose equally. Otherwise, whenever any player does so or if
none does by game end, the Faction that reached the highest victory
margin (7.3) comes in 1st place, 2nd-highest comes in 2nd place,
and so on. Ties go to any Non-players (8.0), then the Romans, then
the Arverni, then the Aedui.
NOTE: If a player runs two Factions, see 1.5.1. If playing soli-
taire, see 1-Player Victory, 8.9.
7.2 Exceeding Victory Threshold
Check victory upon each Victory Phase (6.1), comparing the various
victory totals (in some cases, victory markers, 1.9) to the thresholds
noted on the Faction foldouts or below. Victory conditions are—
• Romans: Subdued plus Dispersed plus Roman Allied Tribes
exceeds 15.
• Arverni: Off-map Legions (Fallen, plus on the Legions Track,
plus removed by Event) exceed six and Arverni Allied Tribes plus
Arverni Citadels exceeds eight.
• Aedui: Aedui Allied Tribes plus Citadels exceeds those of each
other Faction (Gallic, Germanic, and Roman; do not count Forts).
• Belgae: Total Belgic Control Value (Tribe spaces under Belgic
Control, regardless of Allies, and neither Dispersed nor Suebi)
plus Belgic Allies and Citadels exceeds 15.
PLAY NOTES: To check the Roman score, add up the numbers
of non-Roman Allies and Citadels on the map—as shown on the
four Gallic and Germanic Available Forces displays (1.4.1)—and
subtract that sum from 30 (the total number of Tribes on the map,
or from 31 if the Colony Event added a Tribe).
The Arverni, unlike the other Factions, must fulfill both of two
separate conditions.
Belgic Control Value equals the sum of the Control Value of all
Regions under Belgic Control (1.3.1, 1.6), including +1 for a
Region with the “Colony” Event marker (5.0), and -1 for any
non-Suebi Dispersed Tribe (3.2.3). For example, if the Belgae
had Control of the Morini Region with both Tribes there as Belgic
Allies, that would add four to Belgic victory, two each for the
Control and the Allies.
DESIGN NOTE: A Region’s Control Value equals the number
of Tribes in the Region, except for Germania’s two Suebi Tribes,
a guide to that Region’s value to the Belgae. Belgic victory de-
rives in part from Control, to depict their more warlike nature
than that of Gauls in closer Roman contact—the Belgae seek to
dominate regions’ inhabitants not only via alliance but militarily,
by presence of warriors.
7.3 During the Final Winter
If play reaches the final Winter Round (2.4.1, including game end via
the Optimates Event) and no Faction has met its condition set forth
in 7.2, the Faction with the highest victory margin wins. A victory
margin is the amount a Faction is beyond or short of its condition—
• Romans: Subdued plus Dispersed plus Roman Allied Tribes – 15.
• Arverni: Lower of off-map Legions – 6 or Arverni Allied Tribes
and Citadels – 8.
• Aedui: Aedui-Allied Tribes and Citadels – those of the other
Faction with the most.
• Belgae: Belgic Control Value + Belgic Allied Tribes and Citadels
– 15.
NOTE: The margin will be positive if the Faction has reached
its goal, negative or zero if not.
