3.0 COMMANDS
3.1 Commands in General
A Faction executing a Command chooses one of the four Commands
listed on its Faction sheet and selects one or more Regions to be
involved. Commands usually cost Resources per Region selected;
the executing Faction must have the Resources to pay. Select a given
Region only once for a given Command.
The executing Faction chooses the order in which the Command’s
Regions are selected, resolved, and paid for, and chooses own pieces
to be affected or other Factions or pieces targeted. Some Commands
may target only one Faction per Region, others several Factions.
3.1.1 Pawns. Mark Regions selected for various actions such as
Commands and Special Abilities with white and gray pawns. The
pawns are an aid, not a limit on play.
3.1.2 Free Actions. Certain Events (5.4) grant free Commands or
Special Abilities: they cost no Resources and, if executed by a Fac-
tion other than the one playing an Event, do not affect its Eligibility
(2.3.6). Other requirements and procedures still apply unless modi-
fied by Event text (5.1.1).
3.2 Roman Commands
The Romans choose from Recruit, March, Seize, or
Battle Commands.
3.2.1 Recruit. Recruiting places Auxilia and Roman Allied Tribes.
Select any Regions that are not Devastated (4.3.2) and (to have
effect) that have either Roman Control or a Roman Leader, Ally
or Fort. Select just one such Region if this is a Limited Command
(2.3.5). Pay two Resources per Region selected; if the Region is a
part of (within) a Supply Line, instead pay 0.
SUPPLY LINE: A Supply Line is a chain of adjacent Regions reach-
ing a border with Cisalpina (1.4.2), each Region in the chain—in-
cluding where the action is to occur—either having No Control or
under Control (1.6) of a Faction that agrees to the Supply Line at the
moment that the action’s Region is selected. Germans never agree
(3.4.5). NOTE: The Ubii, Sequani, and Provincia Regions border
Cisalpina. One of them alone under friendly or No Control would
qualify. Supply Lines affect Roman Build (4.2.1), Aedui Trade (4.4.1),
and Roman Quarters (6.3.3). See example below.
PROCEDURE: Romans select Regions desired for Recruit and Sup-
ply Lines. Factions declare whether or not they agree to have the
Supply Line include Regions they Control. (The Romans may call
off the Recruit if unhappy with any disagreement, 1.5.2.) Then, in
each Recruit Region, Romans may do one of the following (adjusting
Control, 1.6)—
• If under Roman Control, or if Caesar is there, place one Available
Roman Ally piece at a Subdued Tribe (not the Aedui, Arverni, or
Suebi, 1.4.2, nor at a Dispersed Tribe, 4.2.3).
• If the Region already has a Roman Leader, Allied Tribe, or Fort,
place Available Auxilia (Hidden, 1.4.3) up to the number of Roman
Allied Tribes plus one per Leader and Fort there.
HOME REGION: If placing Auxilia in the Provincia Region, place
one extra, if desired.
3.2.2 Roman March. Marching moves Roman Forces and hides
Revealed Auxilia. Romans may not March upon Frost (2.3.8). Se-
lect any Regions as origins. Pay two Resources per origin Region,
four if Devastated (4.3.2). Form Marching groups as desired from
Roman pieces that begin together in an origin Region—the groups
may include a Leader, Legions, and Auxilia but not Allied Tribes nor
Forts. Pieces within a Region may make up multiple groups. March
no piece more than once. If this is a Limited Command (2.3.5), select
just one origin Region (with multiple groups, if desired).
PROCEDURE: Origin Region by origin Region, flip all Revealed
Auxilia to Hidden; then, as desired, move each Marching group one
by one together into an adjacent Region and, if desired, March into
a 2nd Region that is now adjacent to the group.
• Caesar and any Legions or Auxilia moving with him may March
into a 3rd such Region.
• Any of a group’s pieces may drop off in a Region before the rest
move on, or split off to move by accompanying Scout (4.2.2).
• Upon moving into or out of Britannia (1.3.4) or Germania
(crossing the Rhenus, 1.3.5), and whenever entering (as opposed
to beginning in) a Devastated Region (4.3.2), the group must stop
for that March (even with Caesar).
BRITANNIA: If any group moves into or out of Britannia, no Special
Ability may accompany this March Command (1.3.4, 4.1.3); if a
Special Ability has already been added, no pieces may move into
or out of Britannia on this March.
HARASSMENT: If any part of a group both enters and then leaves a
Region during a single March Command, any Factions with enough
Hidden Warbands there may opt to inflict Losses on the moving
pieces as those pieces depart (not on any dropped off pieces). An-
nounce and inflict Losses in the Faction Order shown on the currently
played Event card (2.3.2), then do so with Germans (3.4.5). Any
agreement earlier that Command not to Harass applies (1.5.2). (For
every three Hidden Warbands that the Faction has there (rounded
down), the Romans must either remove one departing Auxilia or—if
any Legions or Leader remain with the group—may instead roll a
die. If the roll is a 1, 2, or 3 (only), the Romans must remove the
Legion or Leader.
3.2.3 Seize. Seizure extracts Resources from Subdued Tribes, and
can disperse them to keep them in submission. Select any Regions
that have Roman pieces. Pay no Resources.
PROCEDURE: In each selected Region, a Region at a time—
• Dispersal. If the Region has Roman Control, as
the Romans desire, and as long as Dispersed
markers remain available (there are fewer than
four on the map), place a Dispersed Tribe marker
(not yet Gathering, 6.6) onto one or more Subdued
Tribe circles in the Region.
• Rally. For each Tribe just Dispersed (receiving a Dispersed
marker), the Arverni then the Belgae each roll a die and, on a
1, 2, or 3, may free Rally in each Region possible (3.3.1, not in
Devastated) adjacent to that Dispersed Tribe’s Region.
• Forage. Then, only if the selected Region has no Devastated
marker (4.3.2), add +2 Roman Resources for each Subdued or
Roman Allied (not Dispersed) Tribe in the Region, and +6 Roman
Resources for each Dispersed marker that was just placed per the
above.
• Harassment. Lastly, each Faction with Warbands in the selected
Region may opt to inflict Losses on Roman pieces there. Announce
and inflict Losses in the Faction Order shown on the currently
played Event card (2.3.2), then do so with Germans (3.4.5). For
every three Hidden Warbands that the Faction has there, Romans
select and remove one Auxilia or Roman Ally or—if any Legions,
Leader, or Fort there—may instead roll a die. If the roll is a 1, 2,
or 3 (only), the Romans must remove a Legion, Leader, or Fort.
NOTE: This Harassment works the same as that of Marching
Romans (3.2.2).
NOTE: Keep unused Dispersed markers on the Roman Forces
display. Dispersal temporarily blocks placement of Allies (1.4.2)
and cancels the Belgic Control Value of that Tribe for Belgic
Victory (7.2), as the “-1” on the marker reminds.
DESIGN NOTE: The free Rally represents the resentment of
Roman brutality, the Harassment attacks on Roman foraging
parties.
3.2.4 Roman Battle. Battle destroys enemy Forces, including Sub-
duing enemy Allied Tribes and Citadels. Select any Regions with
both Roman and non-Roman Forces. Romans pay two Resources per
Region, four if Devastated (4.3.2). NOTE: A Battle play aid sheet
shows the procedure below as a flowchart.
PROCEDURE: In each of the selected Regions at a time, execute
Battle in the following order.
• Step 1 Target—The Attacker selects exactly one enemy Faction
with pieces in the Region as the Defender.
• Step 2 Declare Retreat—Unless the Defender is Germanic or
has only Allied Tribes (discs) and/or Citadels, it declares whether
or not it will Retreat after the Attack. Germans never Retreat.
Allied Tribe and/or Citadel pieces alone may not Retreat. If the
Retreat is to be to a Region Controlled by another Faction, the
Defender must obtain that Faction’s agreement during this Step.
The Germans never agree. NOTE: Agreement is binding for the
rest of the Battle in this Region.
• Step 3 Attack—Roman Forces in the Battle cause Losses to the
Defending Faction’s Forces as specified under “LOSSES” below.
• Step 4 Counterattack—If the Defender declared a Retreat, skip
this step. If not, surviving Defending Forces cause Losses to
Roman Attackers per below.
• Step 5 Reveal—If a Retreat, skip this step also. If not, flip all
Hidden Warbands and Auxilia of both the Attacker and Defender
in the Region that survived to Revealed.
• Step 6 Retreat—If the Defender did declare a Retreat, the
Defender selects one adjacent Region (it may be across the
adjacency arrows in and out of Britannia). The Region must be
under Control of the Defender or of a Faction that agreed at Step
2 above (not No Control). The Defender must either move all its
surviving Leader and Warbands to that Region or remove them.
EXCEPTION: The Defender may opt to have any Retreating Leader
and/or Hidden Warbands stay put. All Allied Tribes and Citadels
stay in the Region.
LOSSES: The Faction suffering Losses to its Forces, when an op-
tion, chooses which of its own pieces to remove and whether to roll
a die to possibly remove a piece, or to instead automatically remove
other pieces, as follows.
• A Faction must either remove pieces or roll dice, in a sum equal
to ½ for each enemy Warband or Auxilia, plus one per enemy
Leader, plus one per enemy Legion in the Battle. A Defender
taking such Losses when Caesar is Attacking must take two per
Legion instead of just one per Legion.
• The above sum is cut in half for Defenders who Retreat or started
with a Citadel in the Region (even if removed by Besiege, 4.2.3).
• After determining Losses per above, round any fractions down.
• While a Faction has at least one Legion, Citadel, Fort, or Leader
in the Battle, and that piece is able per the bullets below to absorb
a Loss, the Faction may roll a die instead of removing a piece. If
the roll is a 1, 2, or 3 (only), the Faction must remove the Legion,
Citadel, Fort, or Leader (Legion to Fallen, 1.4.1). If the roll is a
4, 5, or 6, the Loss is absorbed without removing any piece. Such
a piece that survives on a roll of 4-6 may be the target of more
rolls to absorb further Losses, until removed on 1-3.
• If the Faction taking Losses is a Defender who has opted to Retreat,
the first Losses taken must be any Allied Tribes and (via die rolls)
any Citadel. In all other cases, any Allied Tribes, Citadel, or Fort
may only take Losses after all other pieces of that Faction in the
Region have already been removed. (Thus, Germans remove their
Warbands before any of their Allied Tribes, see 3.4.5.) NOTE: The
Roman Besiege Special Ability allows easier removal of Allies and
Citadels (4.2.3).
• The Provincia Fort never absorbs Losses (1.4.2).
NOTE: In general, Leaders and Legions cause one enemy Loss
each, Warbands and Auxilia ½ each; a Loss removes an enemy
piece, except for certain hard targets—Leaders, Legions, Forts,
and Citadels—which instead roll and are removed only on a 1-3.
PLAY NOTE: When taking Losses, roll no more dice at a time
than your total Legions, Leaders, Citadels, and Forts, in case
all rolls are 1-3.
NOTE: No Control blocks Retreat (unlike for Supply Line,
3.2.1)—under pressure of enemy cavalry, a retreating force needs
cover from friendly Forces to make it to sanctuary.
NOTE: It is possible for Defenders to Retreat into a Region, then
immediately Battle again.
3.3 Gallic Commands
The Arverni, Aedui, and Belgae
choose from Rally, March, Raid,
or Battle.
3.3.1 Rally. Rally places own pieces. Pay one Resource per Region
selected. Select any Regions that are not Devastated (4.3.2) and
(to have effect) with that Faction’s Control, Ally, Citadel, Arverni
Leader, or “Rally” Symbol.
EXCEPTIONS:
• The Belgae outside Belgica (1.3.1) pay two Resources per Region,
not one.
• The Arverni can select a Region with Vercingetorix in it for Rally
even if that Region is Devastated, paying two Resources.
PROCEDURE: In each selected Region, the executing Faction may
do one of the following—
• If it Controls the Region (1.6), place one of its Ally pieces (not a
Citadel) at a Subdued Tribe there (only Aedui at Aedui [Bibracte]
and Arverni at Arverni [Gergovia], none at Suebi, 1.4.2, nor at
Dispersed, 3.2.3).
• If Aedui or Belgae and the Region already has at least one of that
Faction’s Allied Tribes or Citadels, place its Warbands up to the
number of its Allied Tribes and Citadels there.
• If Arverni and the Region has an Arverni Allied Tribe, Citadel,
or Leader, place Arverni Warbands up to the number of Arverni
Ally, Citadel, and Leader pieces there plus one.
• If the Faction has an Allied Tribe at a City, replace the Ally with
that Faction’s Citadel.
HOME REGION: A Faction that Rallies in a Region marked with
its symbol and “Rally”—Arverni in the Arverni Region, Aedui in
the Aedui Region, or Belgae in any Belgica Region—may place
at least one of its Warbands there even if it has no Ally, Leader, or
Citadel there.
VERCINGETORIX: The Arverni may Rally even in a Devastated
Region if that Region has Vercingetorix. Arverni Rally in a Region
that has Vercingetorix may place an Ally even without Arverni
Control. Finally, it may place either an Ally or Citadel and also
place Warbands, in either order; placement must otherwise be per
the above procedures.
DESIGN NOTE: Placing Citadels represents the readying of
existing fortified places for war by gathering arms, provisions,
and warriors.
PLAY NOTE: Gauls can Rally to exchange a Citadel and Ally
between two Cities by first replacing the Citadel with an Ally
disc (1.4.1).
3.3.2 March. Marching moves and/or hides Gallic Forces. Gauls
may not March upon Frost (2.3.8). Select and pay one Resource
for each origin Region, two if Devastated (4.3.2) at the moment se-
lected. Form groups of the executing Faction’s pieces—groups may
include a Leader and Warbands but not Allied Tribes nor Citadels.
Pieces within a Region may make up multiple groups. March no
piece more than once. If this is a Limited Command (2.3.5), select
just one origin Region.
PROCEDURE: Origin Region by origin Region, flip all the March-
ing Faction’s Revealed Warbands there to Hidden; or, for Scouted
Warbands (4.2.2), instead remove the Scouted marker and leave them
Revealed; then move each Marching group one by one together into
an adjacent Region, if desired.
BRITANNIA: If any group moves into or out of Britannia, no Spe-
cial Ability may accompany this March Command (1.3.4, 4.0); if
a Special Ability has already been added, no pieces may move into
or out of Britannia on this March.
VERCINGETORIX: Vercingetorix and any group of Warbands
Marching with him may enter a 2nd adjacent Region at no added
cost. Restrictions are the same as Roman March into a 2nd Region
(3.2.2), including drop off, Harassment, Devastated, Rhenus, and
Britannia. Romans may use Hidden Auxilia in the 1st Region to
Harass (inflict Losses on) the Arverni passing through.
3.3.3 Raid. Raids add Resources, including stealing from enemies.
Select any Regions where the executing Faction has Hidden
Warbands. Pay no Resources.
PROCEDURE: In each selected Region, the executing Faction flips
one or two of its Hidden Warbands to Revealed. For each Warband
that flipped, it either:
• Adds one Resource, but only if the Region is not Devastated
(4.3.2), OR
• Takes one Resource from a non-Germanic enemy that has pieces
in the Region but neither Citadel nor Fort.
3.3.4 Gallic Battle. Battle destroys enemy Forces, including Sub-
duing enemy Allied Tribes and Citadels. Select any Regions with
both own and other Forces. Pay one Resource per Region, two if
Devastated (4.3.2). NOTE: Gallic Battle repeats much of the Roman
Battle Procedure (3.2.4). See also the Battle play aid.
PROCEDURE: In each of the selected Regions at a time, execute
Battle in the following order.
• Step 1 Target—Attacker selects one Faction with pieces in the
Region as the Defender.
• Step 2 Declare Retreat—Unless the Defender is facing an
Ambush (3.4.4, 4.3.3, 4.4.3, 4.5.3), is Germanic, or has only
Allied Tribe (disc), Citadel, or Fort pieces, it declares whether it
will Retreat. Defenders may not Retreat from Ambush. Germans
never Retreat. Allied Tribe, Citadel, and Fort pieces alone may
not Retreat. If the Retreat (in Step 6) is to be to another Faction’s
Control, that Faction must agree (1.5.2) during this Step. The
Germans never agree.
• Step 3 Attack—Attacking Forces in the Battle cause Losses to
the Defending Faction’s Forces as specified under “LOSSES”
below.
• Step 4 Counterattack—If the Defender declared a Retreat, skip
this step. If not, surviving Defenders cause Losses to Attackers
per below. NOTE: Ambush can block Counterattack (3.4.4, 4.3.3,
4.4.3, 4.5.3).
• Step 5 Reveal—If a Retreat, skip this step. If not, flip all Hidden
Warbands and Auxilia of both the Attacking and Defending
Factions in the Region that survived to Revealed.
• Step 6 Retreat—If the Defender did declare a Retreat, the
Defender selects one adjacent Region that is under Control of
the Defender or a Faction that has agreed (not No Control). The
Defender must either move all its surviving Leader, Warbands,
Auxilia, and Legions to that Region or remove them. Allied Tribes,
Citadels, and Forts stay in the Region. NOTE: Unlike in a Roman
Attack, no Retreating Leaders nor Warbands may stay.
LOSSES: The Faction suffering Losses to its Forces, when an option,
chooses which of its own pieces to remove and whether to roll a
die to possibly remove a piece, or to instead automatically remove
other pieces, as follows.
• A Faction must either remove pieces or roll dice, in a sum equal to
½ for each enemy Warband or Auxilia, plus one per enemy Leader,
plus one per enemy Legion in the Battle. A Defender taking such
Losses when Ambiorix (yellow, Belgic Leader) is Attacking must
take one for each Belgic Warband, not just ½.
• The above sum is cut in half for Defenders who are either
Retreating or have a Citadel or Fort. NOTE: Roman Forts in Battle
work the same as Gallic Citadels.
• After totaling Losses, round fractions down.
• While a Faction has at least one Legion, Citadel, Fort, or Leader
in the Battle, and that piece is able per the bullets below to absorb
a Loss, the Faction may roll a die instead of removing a piece. If
the roll is a 1, 2, or 3 (only), the Faction must remove the Legion,
Citadel, Fort, or Leader (Legion to Fallen, 1.4.1). If the roll is a
4, 5, or 6, the Loss is absorbed without removing any piece. Such
a piece that survives on a roll of 4-6 may be the target of more
rolls to absorb further Losses, until removed on 1-3. (See Ambush,
3.4.4, 4.3.3.)
• If the Faction taking Losses is a Defender who has opted to Retreat,
the first Losses taken must be any Allied Tribes and (via die rolls)
any Citadel or Fort. In all other cases, any Allied Tribes, Citadel, or
Fort may only take Losses after all other pieces of that Faction in
the Region have already been removed. (Germans always remove
their Warbands before any of their Allied Tribes, see 3.4.5.)
• Provincia Fort never absorbs Losses (1.4.2).
3.4 Germanic Commands
The Germanic Tribes Faction during the Germans Phase
(6.2) or when guided by another Faction via Enlist (4.5.1)
or Event (5.0) uses Commands similar to those of the
Gauls (3.3), but costing 0 and differing as follows.
3.4.1 Germanic Rally. Place a Germanic Ally only if the Region
already has Germanic Control (1.6, and never at Aedui [Bibracte]
or Arverni [Gergovia], 1.4.2). Then place Germanic Warbands up
to the number of Germanic Allied Tribes—even if an Ally was just
placed in that Region on the same Rally.
HOME REGION: In Germania Regions, Germanic Rally places at
least one Warband even if no Germanic Ally is present.
NOTE: Similar to Gauls, Germans may not Rally in Devastated
Regions (3.3.1, 4.3.2).
3.4.2 Germanic March. Germanic Warbands within a March ori-
gin Region may form at most a single moving Group to enter one
adjacent Region (any Warbands may stay behind). All Warbands in
Regions selected for March flip to Hidden (or remove their Scouted
marker, 4.2.2), whether or not they move.
3.4.3 Germanic Raid. The target of Germanic Raid is always a
Faction. The target reduces its Resources, but the Germans do not
receive them, as Germanic Resources are not tracked (1.8).
3.4.4 Germanic Battle and Ambush. Germans only initiate Battle
when they can Ambush—the Germans’ only Special Ability (4.1,
4.3.3, 6.2.4)—and always Ambush when they Battle. Therefore,
they only opt for Battle where they have more Hidden pieces than
an enemy. NOTE: Germanic Battle repeats Gallic Battle Procedure
(3.3.4), minus Steps 2 and 6.
PROCEDURE: Execute Germanic Battle in each applicable Region
as follows.
• Step 1 Target—Germans select one non-German Faction with
pieces in the Region (usually randomly, 6.2.4) as the Defender.
NOTE: Skip Step 2; there will be no Retreat.
• Step 3 Attack—The Defending Faction takes Losses as specified
below. (If the Romans are Defending with Caesar, they roll to
determine how they may absorb Losses.)
• Step 4 Counterattack—If and only if Caesar rolled a 4-6 in Step
3, Germans take Losses.
• Step 5 Reveal—Reveal surviving German and Defending Hidden
Warbands and Auxilia.
NOTE: Skip Step 6; there is no Retreat.
LOSSES: The Defender, when an option, chooses which of its own
pieces to remove. Unlike normal Battle and as in other Ambush
(4.3.3), the Defender must remove a piece for each Loss suffered,
including Leader, Legion, Citadel, or Fort without first rolling a 1-3.
• The Defender must remove pieces in a sum equal to ½ per
Germanic Warband there, or half that sum if Defenders have a
Citadel or Fort (then round down).
• The Defender must remove a piece for each Loss suffered,
including Leader, Legion, Citadel, or Fort without first rolling
a 1-3. EXCEPTION: Romans Defending in the same Region as
Caesar on a die roll of 4, 5, or 6 may absorb Losses by rolling a
die and removing Legion, Caesar, or Fort only on 1-3.
• Any Defending Allied Tribes, Citadel, or Fort may only take
Losses after all other Defending pieces there have been removed.
• Germans Counterattacked by Caesar (on a 4-6) remove Warbands
then Allies (3.4.5) equal to ½ per Auxilia (round down), plus one
for Caesar, plus one per Legion in the Battle.
3.4.5 Germanic Losses, Harassment, and Agreement. Germans
suffering Losses in Battle (3.2.4, 3.3.4) remove their Scouted, then
their other Revealed, then Hidden Warbands; finally they remove
their Allies, from Cities last (if any), otherwise chosen at random.
Germans always Harass (3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.3.2) and never agree to
Supply Lines or Retreat in Regions with German Control (3.2.1,
3.2.4, 3.3.4).
4.0 SPECIAL ABILITIES
4.1 Special Abilities in General
When a Faction per the Event card sequence of play (2.3) executes
a Command in at least one Region (3.0), it may also execute one
type of its Special Abilities (EXCEPTION: Limited Commands,
2.3.5). The Germanic Tribes have only one Special Ability—Am-
bush—which they use each time they initiate Battle (3.4.4, 6.2.4).
Some Special Abilities (Build, Entreat, Suborn) cost Resources.
Events may grant free Special Abilities (they neither cost Resources
nor further affect Eligibility, 3.1.2, 5.4). As with Commands, the
executing Faction selects Regions, Tribes, Factions, or pieces af-
fected and in what order. Select a given Region only once for a
given Special Ability.
• A Faction may execute its Special Ability at any one time
immediately before, during, or immediately after its Command.
EXAMPLE: The Aedui run out of Resources while Rallying,
Trade to gain Resources (4.4.1), then continue Rally in additional
Regions.
• Certain Special Abilities—Besiege (4.2.3) and Ambush (4.3.3,
etc.)—modify the procedures of accompanying Battle Commands
rather than interrupting them with separate actions.
NOTE: If the 1st Eligible Faction uses a Special Ability, the
2nd Eligible will have the option to execute the Event, and vice
versa (2.3.4).
4.1.1. Accompanying Commands. Some Special Abilities specify
that they may only be added to certain Commands (3.0), some only
whether the Special Ability and Command may or must select the
same Regions.
4.1.2 Leaders and Special Abilities. As noted in each case below,
most Roman, Arverni, and Belgae Special Abilities may select only
Regions within one Region of the Faction’s named Leader (same
Region or adjacent), or the same Region that has its Successor Leader
(1.4, 1.4.3, 6.6). Roman Scout and Besiege are less restrictive in the
requirement for a Leader (4.2.2, 4.2.3). Aedui have no Leader; their
Special Abilities are limited to a maximum number of Regions (4.5).
Germanic Ambush requires only enough Hidden Warbands (3.4.4).
NOTE: “Within 1 Region of” means in the same and/or adjacent
Regions (1.3.1).
4.1.3 Britannia. No Special Ability may accompany March into or
out of Britannia (1.3.4, 3.2.2, 3.3.2)
