
Event Text and Notes
This section reproduces the full text of each new Ariovistus (A##)
or amended Falling Sky Event card and notes its Faction
Order (2.3.2; Ae=Aedui, Be=Belgae, Ge=Germans, Ro=Romans)
and Non Player Instruction symbols (8.2.1; C=Carnyx L=Laurels,
S=Swords)

A5. Gallia Togata Ro Ge Be L Ae L C
Strategic rear: Place Gallia Togata marker and 3 Auxilia in Cisal-
pina. Only Romans may stack there: non-Romans move their pieces
there to their Home Regions or remove them. Recruit there places
+1 Auxilia. March ignores Alps (A3.2.2); out costs 0.
Cisalpines require garrison: Unless Senate in Adulation, Romans
remove 1 Legion to track and 2 Auxilia to Available.
Rationale. Unshaded effect updated to account for Cisalpina as an
already playable area; adds Arverni trigger.

11. Numidians Ro L Ae L Be L Ar L 
Potent flankers: Romans place 3 Auxilia in a Region within 1 of
their Leader and free Battle there with Auxilia, causing double
Losses (before rounding).
Africans called away: Remove any 4 Auxilia.
Rationale. Unshaded effect tempered to restrict attack to Auxilia,
in order to hinder potentially overwhelming cooperation between
Factions.

A17. Publius Licinius Crassus Ro L Be L Ae L Ge L C
Sent to quash rebellion: Romans may free March a group of 1 4
Legions and 1-8 Auxilia to a Region without Caesar and Battle there,
double Losses by Auxilia.
Assisting father in Parthia: Remove 4 Auxilia from any 1 Region.
Romans Ineligible through next card.

A18. Rhenus Bridge Ro Be Ae Ge C
Punitive expedition: Romans may remove all Germans from 1
Germania Region without Ariovistus and under or adjacent to Ro-
man Control.
Bogged down: If a Legion is within 1 Region of Germania, Romans
-6 Resources and Ineligible through next card.
Rationale. Unshaded effect now blocked by the presence of the
Ariovistus Leader, to prevent unrealistic use of the Event to instantly
wipe out a well-led Germanic horde; adds Arverni trigger.

A19. Gaius Valerius Procillus Ge L Ro Ae S Be C
Caesar’s translator: Among Regions within 1 of Caesar, replace
up to any 3 Allies total with Roman Allies.
Captured: March all Romans in 1 Region to an adjacent one with
Germans. Romans Ineligible through next card.

A20. Morbihan Ge Ro Ae L Be C
Veneti crushed: If Romans within 1 Region of Veneti, they may
remove all Arverni from and free Seize there as if Roman Control
and with no rolls for Gallic Rally.
Superior Celtic ships: If Veneti Arverni Ally, Arverni Warbands
within 1 Region Ambush Romans in a Region within 1 as if there.

A21. Vosegus Ge L Ro Ae Be L C
Decisive battle: Free Battle in a Region within 1 of Sequani. No
Retreat. Then, if desired, free Battle there again (Retreat allowed).

A22. Dread Ge Ro Be S Ae L
Caesar quells fears: Intimidate and Intimidated markers have no
effect on Romans.
CAPABILITY
“Terrible panic”: Intimidate may Reveal 1 added Warband to re-
move 1 extra piece.

A23. Parley Ge L Ro L Be Ae 
Ariovistus meets Caesar: If adjacent, move either Caesar and all
Legions/Auxilia with him or Ariovistus and all Germanic Warbands
with him to the other’s Region. If 2 Regions apart, select 1 Region
adjacent to both and move both groups there. Romans and Germans
Ineligible through next card.

A24. Seduni Uprising! Ge Ro Be S Ae L
Alpine tribes to war: Remove any Allies at Sequani, Helvetii, Nori,
and Helvii. Place Arverni Ally at each and 2 Arverni Warbands each
in Sequani, Cisalpina, and Provincia. Conduct an Arverni Phase as
if At War.

A25. Ariovistus’s Wife Ge Ae L Ro Be S
Killed in battle: Remove all non Leader German pieces from Cis-
alpina. German Resources -6.
King Voccio’s sister: Germans remove any Ally at Nori, place their
Ally and 6 Warbands there, and gain +6 Resources.

A26. Divico Ge L Ae L Ro Be
Peace accord: Remove any Arverni Ally at Helvetii Tribe and all
Arverni Warbands from Sequani and Aedui Regions.
Rejects Caesar’s peace terms: Place up to 12 Arverni Warbands
total among Aedui and Sequani Regions.

A27. Sotiates Uprising! Ge Ae S Ro S Be
Aquitanian tribes to war: Remove any Allies at Pictones, Santones,
Volcae, and Cadurci. Place Arverni Ally at each and 3 Arverni
Warbands each in Pictones and Arverni Regions. Conduct an Arverni
Phase as if At War.

A28. Admagetobriga Ge L Ae Be L Ro
Combined resistance: Free Battle in and adjacent to Sequani,
treating Arverni and—with their agreement—any other Factions’
Warbands and Auxilia as your own. No Retreat.

A29. Harudes Ge Ae Be S Ro L
Reaction: A Gaul or Roman places up to 2 Allies and either 5
Warbands or 3 Auxilia among any Regions with Settlements.
New arrivals in Gaul: Place 4 German Warbands & 1 Settlement
among Regions adjacent to Germania. They free Raid.

A30. Orgetorix Ge L Ae L Be Ro
Arrested: Remove all Arverni from 1 Region within 1 of Sequani.
Pact to seize Gaul: In Aedui and Sequani Regions, remove any Al-
lies and Citadel and place any 9 Arverni pieces total there (despite
Aedui-only stacking).

30. Vercingetorix’s Elite Ar C Ae Be L Ro 
Harsh punishments unpopular: Arverni Rally places Warbands up
to Allies+Citadels (not Leader+1).
CAPABILITY
Roman-style discipline: In any Battles with their Leader, Arverni
pick 4 Arverni Warbands—they take & inflict Losses as if Legions.
Rationale. Shaded effect augmented to make this Arverni Capabil-
ity more comparable in impact to that of Massed Gallic Archers.

A31. German Phalanx Ge Be S Ro Ae
Inflexible: Event effects benefitting Germans in Battle are cancelled,
and Ariovistus does not double Losses.
CAPABILITY
Stalwart: Event effects harming Germans in Battle are cancelled,
and named enemy Leaders do not double Losses to Germans.

A32. Veneti Uprising! Ge Be Ro S Ae S
Maritime tribes to war: Remove any Allies at Veneti, Namnetes,
Morini, and Menapii. Place Arverni Ally at each, 4 Arverni Warbands
in Veneti, and 2 in Morini. Conduct an Arverni Phase as if At War

A33. Wailing Women Ge Be S Ro Ae
Trapped by wagons: Germans never Retreat and, unless Ariovistus
on map, remove their outnumbered Warbands after they Counterat-
tack.
CAPABILITY
Motivation: Defending Germans suffer ½ Losses whether or not
Retreating and inflict +1 Counterattack Loss

A34. Divination Ge Be Ae S Ro S
Heaven’s will unfavorable: A non-German player may use German
pieces to free March or Battle in (or from) up to 3 Regions.
Heaven’s will favorable: Germans or Belgae may execute a free
Command and stay Eligible.

A35. Nasua & Cimberius Ge Be S Ae Ro L
Treveri counter-mobilize: Place 1 Gallic or Roman Ally at Treveri
(replacing anything there) and up to 8 Warbands or 4 Auxilia there.
Brothers mobilize Suebi: Place up to 8 Germanic Warbands and 1
Settlement total among Regions within 1 of Germania.

A36. Usipetes & Tencteri Ge Be S Ae Ro
Slaughter on the Rhenus: Remove 2 Settlements and 8 German
Warbands total from Morini, Nervii, and Treveri Regions.
Cross Rhenus: Germans place 2 Settlements and 4 Warbands, and
remove any 2 Allies among Regions within 1 of Sugambri.

A37. All Gaul Gathers Ae L RoS Ge Be C
Tribes unite: If Aedui or Roman, place any Allies in 1 Celtica Region
within 1 of German Control, then move your Leader and Warbands
or Auxilia there as desired.
Tribes cowed: Remove up to 3 Aedui and/or Roman Allies (not
Citadels) from Celtica Regions within 1 of German Control.

A38. Vergobret Ae Ro L Ge Be C
“Dispenser of judgment”: Suborn can pay to place/remove 1 more
piece per Region (may be Ally) and places Auxilia at 0 cost.
CAPABILITY
Dumnorix subverts magistracy: Suborn only at Diviciacus. If no
Diviciacus, Suborn and Trade only within 1 Region of Bibracte.

O38. Diviciacus Ae Ro Ar Be
Caesar’s druid: Place Diviciacus piece in any Region. Ariovistus
Diviciacus Leader rules apply.
CAPABILITY
Pro-Roman sidelined: Romans and Aedui may not transfer Re-
sources to one another.
Rationale. Unshaded effect updated to account for the optional ad-
dition to Falling Sky scenarios of the expansion Diviciacus Leader
rules and piece.

39. River Commerce Ae Ro S Ar Be S
Goods arteries: Aedui Trade yields Resources regardless of Sup-
ply Lines.
CAPABILITY
War interferes: Trade is maximum 1 Region.
Rationale. Unshaded effect augmented to make this Event more
comparable in attractiveness to other Aedui Capabilities.

A40. Alpine Tribes Ae Ro Be L Ge C
Join Gallic campaign: Place up to any 3 Warbands, 2 Auxilia, or 1
Ally in each of 3 Regions within 1 of Cisalpina.
Threaten communications: –5 Roman Resources for each of up to
3 Regions within 1 of Cisalpina that are not under Roman Control.
Stay Eligible.
Rationale. Updated for Ariovistus scenario use of Cisalpina; un-
shaded effect tempered to provide no Resources, in order to balance
increased possibility of receiving Allies and higher general impor-
tance of this corner of the map; adds Arverni trigger.

A43. Dumnorix Ae Ge Ro Be C
Discovered: Replace 2 Arverni Allies and 2 Arverni Warbands within
1 Region of Bibracte with Roman or Aedui counterparts (Warbands
with Auxilia).
Diviciacus’s rebel brother: Remove Bituriges, Bibracte, and Helvetii
Citadels/Allies. Arverni place Ally (despite Aedui-only stacking)
and 2 Warbands at each.

44. Dumnorix Loyalists Ae L Ar L Ro Be
Betrayed by Caesar’s informants: Replace any 4 Warbands with
Auxilia or Aedui Warbands. They free Scout (as if Auxilia).
“Dumnorix’s madness” lingers: Replace any 3 Auxilia or Aedui
Warbands total with any Warbands. Execute a free Command in
Regions placed.
Rationale. Shaded effect augmented to make it more comparable in
attractiveness to Command and Special Ability alternatives.

A45. Savage Dictates Ae Ge Ro Be L C
Tribes seek protection after atrocities against Sequani: Place up
to 3 non-German Allies in Celtica within 1 Region of Intimidated
markers.
“Arrogant and cruel commands”: Germans may free Intimidate
now, anywhere regardless of Ariovistus or Control.

A51. Siege of Bibrax Ae Be Ro Ge C
Caesar and Diviciacus aid Remi: If Remi Roman or Aedui Ally or
Subdued, place 4 Auxilia or Aedui Warbands and a Fort and remove
up to 6 Belgic Warbands there.
Walls undermined: Remove up to 5 non-Legion, non-Leader Roman
and/or Aedui pieces from Atrebates Region.

A53. Frumentum Ae L Be Ge Ro L C
Aeduan corn: Aedui specify an amount of their Resources. Romans
then spend them as desired on Recruit + March + 1 Special Ability
(any order, no effect on Eligibility).
Promises not kept: Aedui and Roman Resources -4 each. Both
Ineligible through next card. Executing Faction stays Eligible.

54. Joined Ranks Ae S Be S Ar S Ro S 
Relief force: Executing Faction may free March a group of up to
8 pieces to a Region that already has at least 2 other Factions. The
executing Faction, then a 2nd player Faction, may each free Battle
there against a 3rd Faction. In the 1st Faction’s Battle, no Retreat
allowed.
Rationale. Text clarified to deny the “no Retreat” effect to the 2nd
Faction even if the 1st Faction declines to attack, in order to hinder
a potentially unrealistic cooperation between Factions.

A56. Galba Be Ro Ge S Ae L C
Surrenders hostages to Caesar: Remove all Belgae except Leader
from Atrebates Region. Belgae Resources -4.
King of the Belgae: Place 4 Belgic Warbands and 2 Belgic Allies
(that may replace other Allies) in Belgica. Belgae Resources +4.

A57. Sabis Be L Ro Ge L Ae C
Decisive battle: Free Battle in a Belgica Region. No Retreat. Then,
if desired, free Battle there again (Retreat allowed).

A58. Aduatuci Be Ro Ae Ge C
Treachery punished: Romans may free Battle anywhere in Belgica,
then free Seize in Belgica as if Roman Control, with no Harassment
or enemy Rally.
False peace: In 1 Belgica Region, replace 1 Roman Ally and 3
Auxilia with yours (Warbands for Auxilia), free Ambush Romans.

A60. Iccius & Andecomborius Be Ro Ae L Ge S C
Remi refuse to rebel: Place Roman Ally at Remi (replacing any
Ally there) and up to 4 Auxilia there. For each piece not placed,
Roman Resources +2.
Remi submit: In Atrebates, replace up to 5 Roman pieces with Bel-
gae—Allies with Allies and/or Auxilia with Warbands.

A63. Winter Campaign Be Ge Ro Ae L C
Corn storage: Romans pay costs of Quarters only in Devastated
Regions.
CAPABILITY
Cold war: Unless Roman, take this card—after each Harvest, you
may do any 2 Commands and/or Special Abilities (paying costs).
Rationale. Updated to allow German use of shaded effect; adds
Arverni trigger.

A64. Abatis Be Ge Ae Ro S C
Felled trees: Place your Faction’s Abatis marker in a Region where
you have a Warband. When you defend, Abatis acts as a Fort for
you and negates all Losses caused by Auxilia. Roman March treats
Abatis as Devastation.

A65. Kinship Be L Ge L Ae Ro C
Family feud: In any Regions, either Belgae without Leader Battle
Germans or Germans without Leader Battle Belgae.
Intermarried: Replace 4 Warbands and 2 Allies of either the Belgae
or Germans with those of the other.

A66. Winter Uprising! Be L Ge L Ae S Ro S C
Girding for war: Take this card. Place Uprising marker in a Region.
After any Quarters Phase, remove Uprising—if from Belgica, Belgae
place 2 Allies and 4 Warbands and execute free Command + Special
Ability within 1 Region of marker; if Germania, Germans do so;
if neither, place 4 Arverni Allies and 8 Arverni Warbands within 1
Region of marker and conduct Arverni Phase as if At War.

A67. Arduenna Be Ae Ro Ge L C
Gaul’s great forest: A Faction other than Arverni may free March
into either or both the Nervii or Treveri Regions, then execute a
free Command except March in one or both, then flip all friendly
pieces there to Hidden.
Rationale. Updated to allow German use of the effect; adds Arverni
trigger.

A69. Bellovaci Be Ae Ro Ge S C
Plead with Caesar and Diviciacus: At Bellovaci, remove Ally if
Belgic and 4 Belgic Warbands. Place Roman or Aedui Ally and 4
Warbands or Auxilia there.
“Strongest among the Belgae”: If Bellovaci a Belgic Ally, place 6
Belgic Warbands there. They Ambush causing 1 Loss each.

A70. Nervii Be Ae Ge S Ro C
Fight to the death: Belgae never Retreat.
CAPABILITY
“Send no envoys… accept no peace terms”: If Nervii Subdued at
end of any Faction’s action, place Belgic Ally there. Belgic Rally
there places +2 Warbands.
