The Gallic War
58-50 BC: Caesar in 57 BC, just two years on campaign, claimed
of his quarry that “the whole of Gaul was pacified”. It would not
be so, as the marrow bones of that land still held years of resistance
and revolt…
This two-part extended scenario covers Caesar’s entire time in Gaul.
Play of Ariovistus from 58 BC leads into an interlude—the relatively
peaceful years 55-54 BC—in which the outcome of the war’s first
half sets the beginning of the second, Pax Gallica?. The Germanic
player of the first half takes on the role of the Arverni for the second.
First Half
Set up and play the Ariovistus scenario (45 Event cards and three
Winter cards), using the rules, cards, and pieces for that scenario.
Interlude
If the game does not end by the 3rd Victory Phase, reset the game
board as follows (do not conduct the rest of the 3rd Winter Round
except as specified below).
Winter Events:
If Winter Uprising! and/or shaded Winter Campaign are in effect,
the appropriate Factions must resolve their effects now (in that order).
Adjust Forces:
Remove any Forces under a Circumvallation marker to Available
and remove the marker.
Player and Non-player Factions adjust Forces in order as follows.
Remove or replace pieces in Home Regions last, otherwise selecting
Regions desired (EXCEPTION: German player and Arverni, see
below). Non-players remove Forces Region by Region at random,
Home Regions last. Remove at least the fraction indicated (round
removals up). Adjust Control as warranted.
German player/Non-player adjusts German Forces:
• Remove Germanic Leader and any 15 Germanic Warbands
(including from Available) from play.
• Replace each Settlement under Germanic Control with one German
Ally at a Subdued Tribe in that Region, if possible. Replace each
remaining Settlement with three Germanic Warbands. Remove
all Settlements from play.
• Remove at least ¼ of total on-map Germanic Allies and ¼
of Germanic Warbands remaining on map (Germania last) to
Available.
Belgae adjusts Belgic Forces:
• Remove at least ½ of total on-map Belgic Allies and ½ of on-map
Belgic Warbands (from Belgica last) to Available.
• Place Ambiorix in Region with most other Belgic pieces (even if
Belgic Leader in Available).
Aedui adjusts Aedui Forces:
• Remove Diviciacus piece from play. (It may return by Event.)
• Replace 1 Aedui Citadel with an Aedui Ally (or remove if no
Aedui Allies Available; Bibracte last).
• Remove to Available at least ½ of total on-map Aedui Allies (not
Citadels) and ½ of on-map Aedui Warbands (Aedui Region last).
• If no Aedui Ally or Citadel at Bibracte, remove whatever is there
and place Aedui Ally there.
German player/Non-player (soon to be Arverni) adjusts Arverni
Forces:
• Place Vercingetorix in the Winter track Spring box.
• Replace 2 Arverni Citadels (Gergovia last) with Arverni Allies
(or remove if no Allies Available,).
• Remove at least ½ of total on-map Arverni Allies (not Citadels)
and ½ of Arverni Warbands to Available. Cadurci and Volcae
Allies may be removed first (otherwise the Arverni Region last).
• If no Arverni Ally or Citadel at Gergovia, remove whatever is
there and place Arverni Ally there.
• Place Arverni Warbands in the Arverni Region until at least 3 are
there.
Roman adjusts Roman Forces:
• Remove at least ½ of total on-map Forts excluding Provincia’s, ½
of Roman Allies, and ½ of Auxilia (no Legions, Provincia last).
• If Roman Leader in Available, place as Caesar in Provincia if
Roman Control, otherwise in Region with most Roman pieces.
Then, unless Gallia Togata is in effect, Factions in the above
order relocate their Forces from Cisalpina to Home Regions (Ally
to Subdued Tribe only) or remove them.
Britannia Expedition:
Romans choose whether to conduct a 54BC Britannia expedition.
(Non-player Romans conduct it if able, A8.8.9.)
• In order to conduct the expedition, the Romans must relocate 3
Legions from the map to the Winter track’s Harvest Phase box,
plus the Roman Leader, another 3 or more Legions, and 1 or more
Auxilia from the map to Britannia.
• If the Romans conduct the expedition, shift the Senate marker 1
box down (toward Adulation, or flip, as appropriate per 6.5.1).
• If the Romans decline or are unable to mount the expedition, no
change to Roman forces, but place 1 Belgic Ally and 2 Belgic
Warbands (and Belgic Control) in Britannia and shift the Senate
marker 1 box up (toward Uproar, or flip, per 6.5.1).
Markers:
Remove the Arverni Home “Rally”, “Britannia (Not in play)”,
Nori Tribe, and Cisalpina Control box markers and all Intimidated
markers.
Spring:
• Conduct a full Spring Phase (6.6), but Romans may keep one
Dispersed or Dispersed-Gathering marker as is. NOTE: This
Roman option represents the severe treatment of the Veneti in
56 BC.
• Put the Winter marker in the Quarters box.
Eligibility Cylinders:
• Replace the German Eligibility cylinder with an Arverni cylinder.
Edge Track:
Adjust Resources as follows.
• Replace the German Resource cylinder with an Arverni cylinder,
at the same amount.
• If any Factions have more than twice their 54BC setup starting
amount of Resources, lower them to twice their 54BC setup
amount (Arverni, Aedui, and Belgae to 10, Roman to 16).
• If any Factions have less than half their 54BC setup starting
amount (if Arverni have 0-2, Aedui 0-2, Belgae 0-2, or Romans
0-3), add +2 to their Resources.
Replace German with Arverni Victory marker. Adjust all Victory
markers to reflect the current situation on the board.
Lingering Events:
Capabilities (including Germanic), Gallia Togata, Colony, and
Abatis that ended the first half in effect remain marked and in effect
where they are.
Deck:
Prepare the deck per the Pax Gallica? setup (70 non- Events and
5 Winter cards), except:
• Use the Ariovistus expansion version of Diviciacus, card A38.
• Keep the cards for any Capabilities that are in effect and for
Gallia Togata and Colony if in effect out of the deck and by
their Factions as appropriate.
• Then create the piles of cards per Pax Gallica? in order, until no
Falling Sky Event cards remain (so that any cards left out will
leave the last piles short). If there is no 14th pile of Event cards
because five or more Falling Sky Event cards were left out, the
5th Winter card will be the last card in deck.
Second Half
Continue play. Any Germanic player from the first half plays as
the Arverni Faction in this half, using Arverni victory conditions.
Original Falling Sky rules are in effect.
During the 1st Winter Round:
Pax Gallica? 1st Winter special rules apply during the 1st Winter
Round after Interlude, except:
• If there are no Legions on the Winter Track, do not place any in
Belgica during that Harvest Phase.
• In that Senate Phase, leave the Senate marker wherever it is on the
Senate track (do not shift or flip it, regardless of Roman victory).
