A5.0 EVENTS
This Ariovistus expansion provides 51 new or updated playing cards:
• Five cards (listed at Deck Preparation, page 13) that replace the
original cards in both Falling Sky and (in the case of four of them)
Ariovistus scenarios. These five cards bear the notation “2nd Ed”.
NOTE: Event Text and Notes in the Ariovistus Playbook discuss
the rationale for each replacement card.
• Thirty-nine cards for use in Ariovistus. They replace cards in the
original Falling Sky deck one-for-one, as detailed in the scenario
setup instructions (A2.1) and bear the number of the card they
replace, preceded by an “A”, in the format “A##”. In addition, they
bear an A symbol to show that they are for use with Ariovistus
scenarios. Many also bear a carnyx Arverni Trigger symbol
(A2.3.9, A6.2).
• Three reference cards with key changes to Roman, Aedui, and
Belgic Faction actions in Ariovistus (A3.1, A2.1).
• Three reference cards with key changes to Roman, Aedui, and
Belgic Non-player rules in Ariovistus (A8.0, A2.1).
• An optional Diviciacus Event card bearing an O symbol and for
use with the new Diviciacus Leader in original scenarios (A1.4).
Arverni At War?
(A2.3.9, A6.2)
Ariovistus
expansion
(A2.1, A5.0)
Germans in
Faction order
(A2.3.2)
A5.1.1 Events vs Rules. In Ariovistus, Eligibility and Ineligibil-
ity Event effects have no impact on the Arverni (by the nature of
Arverni activation in the Sequence of Play via their being At War
and a resulting Arverni Phase, A2.3.9, A6.2). Ariovistus Events that
alter stacking are A30 Orgetorix and A43 Dumnorix.
NOTE: When appearing in Ariovistus, the Event card text “Gallic”
or “Gauls” still means Arverni, Aedui, or Belgae; “Germans” or
“Germanic” means the Germanic Tribes Faction, and so on.
A5.1.4 Event Markers. Ariovistus Events with markers (beyond
Capabilities) include A64 Abatis and A66 Winter Uprising.
A5.4 Free Actions
Event effects granting free Special Abilities can enable Arverni to
Ambush, if applicable, but not to Entreat or Devastate (A4.3).
