A1.0 INTRODUCTION
Ariovistus is a prequel expansion to COIN Series Volume VI, Fall-
ing Sky, which is necessary for play. Ariovistus adds the first part
of the Roman conquest of Gaul, when Caesar intervened against
the migrating Helvetii, turned back a Germanic invasion led by the
Suebi chieftain Ariovistus, and suppressed the strongly resistant
Veneti maritime tribe.
In Ariovistus, one player takes the role of the Germanic Tribes—at
this earlier time a major threat to Gauls and Romans alike. Other
players run the Romans, Aedui, and Belgae as in Falling Sky. The
game runs the Arverni, representing that rival confederation to the
Aedui as well as various other Celtic tribes who will defend them-
selves against all factions and occasionally rise up or seek to expand.
A main Ariovistus scenario adapts Falling Sky to depict Caesar’s
early years in Gaul. An extended scenario links that scenario to
Falling Sky’s “Pax Gallica?” to cover the full duration of the Gallic
War, with the Germanic player inheriting the Arverni position in
its latter half.
This booklet’s rules amend those in Falling Sky, are presented in
like order, and follow the same numbering. New or amended rules
for the Ariovistus expansion bear an “A” in front of the rule number.
Falling Sky rules left unchanged are skipped here.
All printed game components that are to be used in Ariovistus—
cards, markers, aid sheets, and sections of the Germanic Tribes
Available Forces display—are marked or . In ad-
dition, Ariovistus Sequence of Play and Non-Player Guidelines aid
sheets highlight changes from the main game.
Other components provided in this expansion—cards and Available
Forces displays—replace and upgrade components for Falling Sky,
as noted herein. A separate Second Edition Falling Sky Non-Players
booklet replaces the original rules section 8 for any scenario, to
provide improved Non-player opponents.
A1.2 Components
A complete set of Ariovistus includes:
• 51 new or updated playing cards (A5.0).
• 25 embossed wooden Forces pieces and cylinders (A1.4, A1.8,
A2.2).
• A half-sheet of markers.
• 5 sturdier Available Forces displays (1.4.1).
• 1 Germanic Tribes and Sequence of Play sheet (A3.4, A4.6, A2.0,
A6.0).
• 1 Arverni/Celts and Sequence of Play sheet (A6.2, A3.3, A4.3,
A2.0, A6.0).
• 2 Non-Player Germanic Tribes and Instructions foldouts (A8.7,
A8.1-8.4, A8.9).
• 2 Falling Sky Second Edition Non-Player flowchart foldouts (8.5-
8.8).
• Falling Sky Second Edition Non-Players booklet (8.0).
• Ariovistus Playbook.
• This Ariovistus expansion rules book.
A1.2.1 Falling Sky Second Edition Upgrades. Several of the
above components replace those in Falling Sky one for one, for use
in the original scenarios and/or in Ariovistus, as appropriate. These
replacements are:
• The 5 Available Forces displays on more durable high-gloss
cardboard.
• The 2 Non-Player foldouts and the Non-Players rules booklet.
• The 5 of 45 playing cards bearing the notation “2nd Ed” rather
than an replace corresponding cards from the original deck.
• The blue Aedui Leader piece (A1.4), for use with the optional
replacement Diviciacus Event card, Event O38 (see A1.4 and
A2.1), as well as in this Ariovistus expansion.
A1.3.1 Home Regions. Germanic Home Regions in-
clude any with Settlements in them (A1.4). Arverni
Home Regions in Ariovistus are the Veneti, Carnutes,
Pictones, and Arverni Regions; mark these four with
Arverni “Rally” markers (A6.2).
A1.3.2 Tribes. In Ariovistus,
Cisalpina is a playable Region
with 1 Tribe space, the Nori
(A1.4.2) and is worth 1 for Bel-
gic Control victory (7.2-.3).
Mark it at setup with the Nori
Tribe and Control tiles provided.
NOTE: With addition of the Nori
and non-use of the Catuvellauni
(see A1.3.4 below), there remain 30 Tribes total in Ariovistus.
A1.3.4 Britannia. Britannia is a non-playable
area in Ariovistus. It is not a Region and may
hold no pieces (A1.4.2). At setup, place the
“Britannia (Not in play)” reminder marker over
the Catuvellauni Tribe.
A1.4 Forces
Ariovistus adds the following 23 Forces pieces:
2 Leaders, Ariovistus/Germanic Successor and Diviciacus (the Aedui leader)
6 Germanic Settlements
15 additional Germanic Warbands
ARIOVISTUS: The Ariovistus expansion provides a Ger-
manic Leader piece by that name (embossed end up) and
possible Successor (embossing down). As detailed in the
relevant rules sections below and on the new Germanic
Tribes aid sheet, Ariovistus has unique effects on Ger-
manic Raid (A3.4.3) and Battle (A3.2.4, A3.4.4) and on Belgic
Enlist (A4.5.1). The Germanic Leader limits locations of Germanic
Special Abilities in the usual way (A4.1.2, A4.6).
DIVICIACUS: The Ariovistus expansion adds an Aedui
Leader piece, Diviciacus (embossing up) with effects as
follows.
• Diviciacus if on the map restricts Aedui Special Abilities to his
or adjacent Regions (A4.1.2, Suborn and Aedui Ambush are still
maximum 1 Region). NOTE: If Diviciacus is removed, the normal
Falling Sky rule again applies.
• Within 1 Region of Diviciacus, if Romans and Aedui agree, they
may treat Aedui Warbands and Auxilia together each as the other
for Roman and Aedui Commands and Special Abilities and for
defense in Battle (A3.1, A4.1, including for the distance of any
ensuing March and for enabling or blocking Ambush, 4.3.3).
NOTE: This effect is a version—enhanced by including Special
Abilities—of the original unshaded DIVICIACUS Capability (card
38, 5.3).
• Diviciacus in Battle may not absorb Losses until he is the last
possible piece to do so. A Loss removes Diviciacus only on a roll
of “1” (not 1-3). DESIGN NOTE: Diviciacus, most active early
in the Gallic War, was more politician and diplomat than military
leader.
• Diviciacus if removed is taken out of play, not Available; he has
no Successor.
Diviciacus Leader Option: The Diviciacus piece also may be
used in original scenarios along with the replacement Diviciacus
2nd Ed card 38 (see A5.0 and A2.1 Deck Preparation).
VERCINGETORIX: The Ariovistus expansion does not use the
Arverni Leader piece.
BODUOGNATUS: Ariovistus uses the Ambiorix Leader piece to
represent Nervii commander Boduognatus. He has the same proper-
ties; treat all references to “Ambiorix” as “Boduognatus”.
SETTLEMENTS: Germanic Settlements are a new Forces piece
type in the Ariovistus expansion (representing Germans migrating
into Gaul). They have the following properties, as detailed also in
relevant sections below and on the new Germanic Tribes aid sheet.
• Stacking (A1.4.2) limits Settlements to one per Region (much
like Roman Forts, they do not require a Tribe location).
• Settlements are placed via Settle Special Ability (A4.6.1) or
Events, not by Rally.
• For Germanic Rally (A3.4.1), Settlements are akin to Germanic
Allies and make their Region a Germanic Home Region.
• Settlements in Battle (A3.4.4) act as Germanic Allies—they absorb
Losses in the same way and can be removed by Roman Besiege
(A4.2.3).
• Settlements are immune to Roman Build (4.2.1) and Aedui Suborn
(4.4.2). NOTE: Arverni Entreat does not occur in Ariovistus
(A4.3), so cannot affect Settlements.
• Settlements affect Germanic, Roman, and Aedui victory (A7.2-.3).
A1.4.1 Available Forces. A new Germanic Tribes Available Forces
display features gray-bordered holding areas—marked with —for
the added black pieces used in Ariovistus. (Ignore these holding
areas for the original scenarios.) Place Available Settlements in the
highest-numbered empty spaces of their row, showing how many
are on the map, counted separately from Germanic Allies.
DIVICIACUS PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL: Aedui Leader
Diviciacus is placed either per Ariovistus setup (A2.1) or via the
optional replacement Diviciacus Event card A38 (A1.4, A2.1).
If removed, Diviciacus is removed from play and Aedui Special
Abilities revert (from A4.1.2 and A4.4) to original rules (4.1.2, 4.4).
NOTE: Diviciacus piece is never Available, only set up, placed by
Event, or removed from play (A1.4).
A1.4.2 Stacking. Any number of Forces may occupy a Region,
except:
• A maximum of 1 Germanic Settlement (A1.4) may occupy each
Region.
• Cisalpina is a playable Region in Ariovistus that may hold pieces
normally. It has 1 Tribe space (the Nori, A1.3.2).
• Britannia is non-playable in Ariovistus and may hold no pieces
(A1.3.4).
A1.5 Players & Factions
Ariovistus is playable by one to four players, with players or Non-
players running the Germanic Tribes, Romans, Aedui, and Belgae.
The game system runs the Arverni Faction (representing the Arverni
Confederation and other anti-Roman or anti-Aedui Celts). An ex-
tended scenario, The Gallic War, begins with roles as per Ariovistus,
with the Germanic player (if any) after an Interlude shifting to the
role of Arverni (A2.1).
A1.5.1 Spare Factions. With three players in Ariovistus, one player
runs Germans and Belgae or, if preferred, Romans and Aedui. With
two players, one runs Germans and Belgae, the other Romans and
Aedui. Alternatively, Non-player rules (section 8, A8.0, A8.7) can
substitute for any players.
A1.5.2 Negotiation. In Ariovistus, the Germans may agree to use
of their Controlled Regions for Supply Lines or Retreat (A3.2.1,
A3.2.4, A3.4.5), opt to Harass the Romans or not (3.2.2, 3.2.3),
and give or receive Resource transfers just as the other Factions
do. The Arverni never agree, Harass at every opportunity, and may
not receive Resources.
A1.8 Resources
Track German Resources in Ariovistus with a black cyl-
inder. Arverni do not track Resources (set green cylinders
aside).
A1.9 Victory Markers
Track Germanic victory in Ariovistus—Germania Regions and Ger-
man Settlements under Germanic Control (A7.0)—with the marker
provided. The Arverni victory marker is not used (7.0).
