A4.0 SPECIAL ABILITIES
A4.1 Special Abilities in General
The Germans in Ariovistus execute Special Abilities in the same
general way that other Factions do, as detailed in the new rules
section A4.6 below.
A4.1.2 Leaders and Special Abilities. In Ariovistus, as noted in the
rules below, German and Aedui Special Abilities may select only
Regions within a distance of 1 Region of that Faction’s named Leader
(same Region or adjacent), or (for Germans) the same Region that
has its Successor Leader (A1.4).
• The Aedui with Diviciacus retain other restrictions on selection
of locations, such as the maximum of one Region each for
Suborn and Ambush. If Diviciacus piece is removed, there is no
Successor—the Aedui revert to the original rules from Falling
Sky for their Special Abilities (4.1.2, 4.4).
A4.2 Roman Special Abilities
Amendments to Roman Special Abilities concern Supply
Lines and Settlements.
A4.2.1 Build. Supply Lines for Build in Ariovistus are modified per
A3.2.1 (they must include Provincia or Cisalpina).
A4.2.3 Besiege. Besieging in a Battle against Germans may remove
a Settlement (A1.4) from the Region instead of an Ally (Attacker
choice).
A4.3 Arverni Special Ability–Ambush
The Arverni in Ariovistus have only a single Special
Ability—Ambush—which they use each time that they
Attack in Battle; they never Entreat or Devastate.
A4.3.3 Ambush. Arverni in Ariovistus always accompany their
Battle with Ambush and so, in order to Attack in Battle, must begin
that Command with more Hidden Arverni than Hidden Defenders;
they do not need a Leader. The procedure for Arverni Ambush is
the same as the original (4.3.3).
NOTE: Arverni Battle and Ambush in Ariovistus works the same way
as Germanic Battle and Ambush in the original Falling Sky (3.4.4).
A4.4 Aedui Special Abilities
If the Diviciacus piece is on the map, Suborn, Trade, and
Aedui Ambush may occur only within a distance of one
Region from Diviciacus (A1.4, A4.1.2). Supply Lines for
Trade in Ariovistus are modified per A3.2.1 (they must
include Provincia or Cisalpina).
A4.5 Belgic Special Abilities
The only amendment to Belgic Special Abilities for Ar-
iovistus concerns Enlist.
A4.5.1 Enlist. Enlist in Ariovistus is restricted and altered as follows.
• Each Enlist may affect no more than a total of four Germanic
Warbands and Allies; it affects neither Germanic Leader nor
Settlements. This limit applies both to treating Germanic
Warbands (black) as if they were Belgic Warbands (yellow) and
to executing one free Command with Germanic pieces.
• Enlist may not select a Region containing the Ariovistus Leader
(A1.4).
• Enlist to execute a free Germanic Raid Command provides
Resources to the Germans (per A3.4.3).
• Enlist to execute a free Battle Command with up to four Germanic
Warbands in one Region does not add Ambush (A3.4.4). The
Battle ignores other Germanic pieces in the Region.
NOTE: Belgic Rampage, as in the original Falling Sky (3.4.4),
may not Target Germans. When Rampage Targets Arverni, they
are removed rather than Retreating, since the Arverni in Ariovistus
never Retreat (A3.2.4).
A4.6 Germanic Special Abilities
The Germanic Tribes in Ariovistus choose from Settle,
Intimidate, and Ambush Special Abilities.
A4.6.1 Settle. Settling establishes Germanic Settlements
in Gaul—the main measure of Germanic victory. It may
accompany Rally or March Commands (A3.4.1 .2), not
Raid or Battle. Select Regions as desired that are:
• Outside Germania (1.3.1), AND
• Adjacent to Germania and/or to a Germanic Settlement (A1.4)
already on the map, AND
• Under Germanic Control (1.6), AND
• Within a distance of one Region from Ariovistus, or the Region
with his Successor (A4.1.2).
PROCEDURE: Each selected Region, pay two Resources—or four
Resources if Devastated—to place one Settlement there (within
Stacking, so only if no Settlement is there, A1.4.2). NOTE: A Settle
Special Activity can place a Settlement in one Region, then use that
new Settlement to immediately qualify a second, adjacent Region
for further Settling. Also, Settling is allowed in a Region that is
Devastated (by Drought).
A4.6.2 Intimidate. Intimidation cows enemies into submission. It
may accompany March, Raid, or Battle Commands (A3.4.2 .4), not
Rally. Select Regions as desired that either:
• Have Ariovistus (A1.4), OR
• Are under Germanic Control (1.6) and either lie within a distance
of one Region from Ariovistus or have his Successor in them
(A4.1.2).
PROCEDURE: Each selected Region, flip one or two Hidden Ger-
manic Warbands to Revealed in order to place an Intimidated marker
there (if none is there already) and to remove that many Warbands,
Auxilia, and/or Allies there of one Faction that has no Leader there.
INTIMIDATED: Intimidated markers block Recruit and
Rally in their Region by non-Germanic Factions that have
no Leader there (A3.2.1, A3.3.1). Only one Intimidated
marker may occupy each Region. They are removed in Spring
(A6.6).
NOTE: Germanic Warbands Raiding in Ariovistus’s Region may
Intimidate for free, without it counting as a Special Ability (A3.4.3);
they could Intimidate there again with additional hidden Warbands
if the Germans then added Intimidate as a normal Special Ability.
A4.6.3 Ambush. Germanic Ambush in Ariovistus selects Regions
and modifies Battle like Arverni Ambush in Falling Sky (4.3.3)
but uses Germanic instead of Arverni pieces (including Ariovistus
instead of Vercingetorix).
