A6.0 WINTER
The Ariovistus Sequence of Play sheet highlights chang-
es to the Winter Round in light tan .
A6.1 Victory Phase
In Ariovistus, the Germans track victory and the Arverni do not
(A1.9, A7.0).
A6.2 Arverni Phase
Winter has no Germans Phase in Ariovistus. Instead,
Arverni Forces if “At War” will Rally, March, Raid, and
Battle with Ambush after regular Faction activations
whenever cued by the “At War?” carnyx symbol during
an Event card sequence of play (A2.3.9), as follows and as sum-
marized on the “Arverni and Other Celts” aid sheet.
NOTE: Ariovistus “Arverni Phase” rules appear here in the Winter
Round section because they replace Falling Sky’s Germans Phase,
not because the Arverni activate in Winter.
The Arverni are At War if any non-Arverni Forces are
in any Arverni Home Regions or are with any Arverni
Allies or Citadels in any other Regions. Otherwise, the
Arverni are At Peace. (The four Arverni Home Regions
in Ariovistus are the Veneti, Carnutes, Pictones, and Arverni
Regions, A1.3.1.) Mark any Regions meeting the above conditions
(or the Arverni pieces there) with At War markers.
• If the Arverni are At War, continue with the Arverni activation. If
they are At Peace, skip Arverni activation (the rest of the Arverni
Phase) and proceed to the next card.
Arverni Home Regions in Ariovistus (A1.3.1).
PLAY NOTE: Track overall Arverni status during play
using an At War/At Peace marker near the deck and in
triggering Regions (A2.3.9, A6.2).
SELECT TARGETS: If At War, the Arverni then select a Target
Region and Target Faction for this activation, as follows.
• Consult the “Roll to Select Targets” table on the “Arverni and
Other Celts” sheet. Roll a die to select a Target Region from
among the Regions that cause the Arverni to be At War—selecting
either the Triggering Region with the most enemy pieces total or
a named (Arverni Home) Region that has enemies in it. If the roll
does not yield such a Region, track down the column until one
is found, return up to the top after reaching the bottom. Choose
among equal candidate Regions randomly. NOTE: If there are
no non-Arverni pieces in any Arverni Home Regions, the choice
will be among Regions with any Arverni Ally or Citadel and the
most enemies.
• Then roll again to select a Target Faction that has Forces in the
Target Region—either a named Faction or the Faction with the
most pieces there (randomly if tied).
• Mark the Target Faction and Region by placing the
green Arverni “Target” marker on that Faction’s
piece(s) in that Region.
• Proceed with Rally, March, Raid, and Battle.
NOTE: Arverni actions below are similar to those of Falling Sky’s
Germans Phase, adjusting for the Arverni’s different Rally procedure
and for the selection of a Target Region and enemy.
A6.2.1 Arverni Rally. First, Arverni Rally using their usual proce-
dure (3.3.1), including placing Warbands equal to Allies and Citadels
plus 1, the option to place a Warband in a Home Region even if no
Ally there, and the inability to Rally in Regions that are Intimidated
(A6.2.1) or Devastated (by the Drought Event).
• The Arverni Rally as follows only in those Regions meeting the
conditions above to set Arverni At War (“At War Regions”)—
Arverni Home or Arverni Ally/Citadel Regions that have non-
Arverni pieces in them (regardless of which such Region is the
Target Region).
• First, use Rally in whatever At War Regions possible to replace
Arverni Allies in Cities with Citadels.
• Then use Rally (where no Citadel placed) in whatever other At
War Regions possible to place Arverni Allied Tribes (at most one
Ally per Region), starting at Cities, then in Arverni Home Regions,
then elsewhere.
• Then use Rally in remaining At War Regions (where no Ally or
Citadel placed) to place as many Arverni Warbands as possible
(accounting for the extra Warband, Arverni Home Regions, and
so on).
• Choose among otherwise equal locations randomly (using an
equal chance die roll).
• Adjust Control as needed.
A6.2.2 Arverni March. Next, Arverni March by the usual rules
(3.3.2)—without Vercingetorix on the map, to adjacent Regions only.
If Frost (on an Event card when the next card showing is Winter,
2.3.8), skip Arverni March.
• Flip all Arverni Warbands to Hidden (or remove their Scouted
markers, 4.2.2). (Warbands that do not move in effect Marched
within their Regions.)
• Form a group of Arverni Warbands to March out of each Region—
except the Target Region—that has at least 1 Arverni Warband
beyond the pieces needed for Arverni Control (1.6), regardless
of any Rally there. NOTE: Arverni where no Arverni Control or
where exactly enough for such Control therefore would not move.
• March out with as many Warbands as possible without losing
Arverni Control. Move the largest Warband groups first.
• Select the Target Region first as a destination, if possible, and
March all moving groups that are adjacent to there (3.3.2). Then
select at most one additional destination Region that has either
Aedui or Roman Control in it—Aedui first—and where movement
in by remaining adjacent Marching Warband groups would remove
that Control (perhaps adding Arverni Control). March those
groups in.
• Adjust Control as needed.
A6.2.3 Arverni Raid. Arverni then Raid (3.3.3) with as many
Warbands as able per below.
• Raid only with (Hidden) Warbands that are not needed to enable
an Arverni Ambush in their Region (4.3.3, either because there
are enough other Hidden Arverni Warbands there to Ambush an
enemy, or because no Ambush that would cause losses is possible
there in any case)—even if Romans and Aedui agree to share
Auxilia and Warbands via Diviciacus (1.4).
• Raid only against Factions that have more than 0 Resources (and
no Fort or Citadel) and only until that Faction reaches 0 Resources.
• Raid against the selected Target Faction (A6.2) first, then player
Factions, then Non-players (8.0). Otherwise, choose randomly
among Target Factions within a Region.
A6.2.4 Arverni Battle with Ambush. Finally, the Arverni may
Battle with Ambush.
• Battle with Ambush (3.3.4, 3.4.4, 4.1) in each Region where the
Arverni currently are able to do so (only wherever Hidden Arverni
Warbands are with another Faction with fewer Hidden pieces) and
would cause an enemy Loss. Adjust Control as needed.
• Battle in the selected Target Region first, then in other Regions
in random order.
• Within each Battle Region, Attack the selected Target Faction (if
there and an enemy Loss is possible), otherwise another Faction,
player before Non-player (8.0).
• Choose among otherwise equal candidate enemies in a Region
randomly.
A6.3 Quarters Phase
In Ariovistus, Quarters order is Belgae, then Aedui, then Germans,
then Romans.
A6.3.1 Arverni. Arverni Warbands in Ariovistus do not relocate
during Quarters (even from a Devastated Region).
A6.3.2 Gauls and Germans. First the Belgae, then the Aedui, then
the Germans relocate and roll for their own Warbands and Leaders
on the map as follows:
• They may relocate any such pieces to any adjacent Regions
without Devastation (4.3.2) and under Control (1.6) of their
Faction or a Faction that agrees (not Arverni Control).
• Then they must roll a die for each Warband they have in a
Devastated Region in which they have neither Allied Tribe nor
Citadel nor Settlement and remove the Warband on a 1-3.
A6.3.3 Romans. Roman Quartering in Ariovistus is unchanged from
Falling Sky. NOTE: Supply Lines—important for Roman reloca-
tion to Provincia—in Ariovistus must include either Provincia or
Cisalpina (A3.2.1).
A6.4 Harvest Phase
Differences in Ariovistus concern the presence of Settlements and
Germanic Resources and the absence of Arverni Resources.
A6.4.1 Roman Earnings. The Romans receive Resources equal to
their current Victory score: Subdued plus Dispersed plus Roman
Allied Tribes, less the number of Settlements (A7.2).
A6.4.2 Gallic Earnings. The Arverni, do not earn Resources in
Ariovistus.
A6.4.4 Germanic Earnings. The Germans receive Re-
sources equal to twice the number of their Allies plus
Settlements on the map (A1.4).
A6.5 Senate Phase
A6.5.1 Senate Marker. In The Gallic War scenario, do
not shift the Senate marker during the first Senate Phase
after the Interlude (A2.1 Setup page 17).
DESIGN NOTE: The Senate marker in the Pax Gallica? scenario
during the 1st Senate Phase moves from the Winter track to Intrigue.
In The Gallic War, it will remain on the Senate track but not be af-
fected by the removal of Allies during Interlude until the Gauls have
had an opportunity to again challenge the Romans.
A6.5.2 Legions. In Ariovistus, place a maximum total of two Legions
from the Intrigue and/or Adulation rows into Provincia each Senate
Phase (or fewer, per the usual rule).
A6.6 Spring Phase
In Ariovistus, in addition to the usual steps:
• Remove all Intimidated markers (A4.6.2).
NOTE: The Aedui never receive a Successor to Diviciacus (A1.4).
