A3.0 COMMANDS
A3.1 Commands in General
In Ariovistus, the Germanic Tribes Faction uses a new set of Com-
mands, as detailed in A3.4, similar to those of the Gallic Factions.
The differences between Ariovistus Germanic Commands and those
in Falling Sky include:
• They can cost or add to German Resources.
• Some account for whether or not they occur in Germania or for
Ariovistus Leader effects.
• Battle may occur without Ambush.
The Arverni Faction in Ariovistus uses the same Commands as the
Arverni do in Falling Sky, however without Vercingetorix and—
similar to the Germans in Falling Sky—always pairing Battle with
Ambush (A3.3.4).
In addition, the Ariovistus expansion alters other Factions’ Com-
mands in various ways:
• Roman Recruit and Gallic Rally can be blocked by Germanic
Intimidation (A3.2.1, A3.3.1, A4.6.2).
• Supply Lines account for Cisalpina as a playable Region (A3.2.1).
• Roman March stops when moving into or out of Cisalpina (similar
to Britannia or Germania, A3.2.2).
• Battle can remove Settlements, may have to account for Ariovistus
counterattacking, and affects Diviciacus differently than other
Leader pieces (A1.4, A3.2.4).
DIVICIACUS: Within 1 Region of Diviciacus, if Romans and Aedui
agree, Aedui Warbands and Auxilia together may treat each as the
other for Roman and Aedui Commands and Special Abilities and
for defense in Battle (A1.4, A4.1).
NOTE: A reference playing card for each of the Roman, Aedui, and
Belgic Factions lists key changes in Ariovistus to their Commands,
Special Abilities (A4.0), and victory (A7.0).
A3.2 Roman Commands
A3.2.1 Recruit. Recruit may not select Regions that are
Intimidated (A4.6.2) unless that Region has a Roman
Leader in it.
SUPPLY LINE: In Ariovistus, a Supply Line must include Provincia
and/or Cisalpina (A1.3.2, A1.4.2) in its chain of adjacent Regions
that are not under hostile Control. Germans may agree or not; Arverni
never agree (A1.5.2).
A3.2.2 Roman March.
ALPS: Upon Marching into or out of Cisalpina (A1.3.2, A1.4.2), a
Roman group must stop for that March.
HARASSMENT: A Germanic player may opt to inflict Harassment
Losses (A3.4.5, including for Seize, 3.2.3) or not, just as Gallic
players can; Arverni always opt to do so.
A3.2.3 Seize. Germans and Arverni Harass as for Roman March
above. Arverni execute any free Rally from Dispersed markers per
A6.2.1.
A3.2.4 Roman Battle. Germans may declare Retreat and do so the
same way as Gallic Factions, including the option to stay put with
their Leader and Hidden Warbands when facing Romans. The Arver-
ni never Retreat nor agree to any Retreat to their Control (A1.5.2)
LOSSES:
• Germanic Settlements (A1.4) absorb Losses and are removed as
if Germanic Allies (when both are present, the Germans choose
which will absorb the Loss).
• The Ariovistus piece in Battle causes the enemy to take double
Losses unless that enemy is Defending with Fort or Citadel.
NOTE: An Attacker, even with a Fort or Citadel, fighting
Ariovistus would take double Losses in any German counterattack.
This effect essentially is a shaded Germanic Horse Capability
(card 59, 5.3) inherent to the Ariovistus Leader.
• The Diviciacus piece in Battle may not absorb Losses until he is
the last possible piece to do so. A Loss removes Diviciacus only
on a roll of “1” (not 1-3). (Losses affect the Ariovistus piece the
same as other Falling Sky Leaders.)
• Arverni suffering Losses in Battle remove their Scouted Warbands,
then other Revealed Warbands, then Hidden Warbands; then their
Allies, from Cities last; finally their Citadels.
A3.3 Gallic Commands
A3.3.1 Rally. Gallic Rally (includ-
ing by Arverni) may not select
Regions that are Intimidated
(A4.6.2) unless that Region has the
Rallying Faction’s Leader in it.
NOTE: Arverni Rally per 3.3.1 will place Warbands equal to Arverni
Allies and Citadels plus 1, or just 1 Warband in an Arverni Home
Region if no Arverni Ally is there.
A3.3.3 Raid. Gallic Raids may take Resources from the Germans.
A3.3.4 Gallic Battle. The changes to Battle listed for Roman Battle
(A3.2.4) also apply to Gallic Battle.
NOTE: Germanic and Gallic Leaders and Warbands Retreating from
each other may not stay put; they must reach an adjacent Region
under friendly Control or be removed.
A3.4 Germanic Commands
This section for the Ariovistus expansion replaces 3.4
entirely. Germanic Rally, March, Raid, and Battle in
Ariovistus follow the same rules as their Gallic counter-
parts (3.3, A3.3) except as follows.
A3.4.1 Germanic Rally. The Germans may select Regions for Rally
regardless of Intimidation (A4.6.2). They pay two Resources if the
Region has no Settlement and is outside Germania, or one Resource
at a Settlement, or 0 Resources in Germania (Home Regions).
NOTE: Germans may not Rally in a Devastated Region (3.3.1, 4.3.2),
possible in Ariovistus via the Drought Event.
PROCEDURE: Place one Germanic Ally only if the Region already
has Germanic Control (1.6, and never at Aedui [Bibracte] or Arverni
[Gergovia], 1.4.2). Alternatively, place Germanic Warbands up to the
number of Germanic Allies plus Settlements in the Region.
NOTE: The Germans place Settlements via Settle Special Ability
(A4.6.1) and Events (5.0), not Rally.
HOME REGIONS: At the end of Germanic Rally in each Region
that has a Settlement or is in Germania, place one additional Ger-
man Warband there, regardless of whether the Rally placed an Ally,
Warbands, or nothing.
NOTE: The manner in which a single German Rally can place an
Ally then Warbands into a Region differs from the original game.
A3.4.2 Germanic March. The German Leader and Warbands March
in the same way as Gallic Leaders and Warbands do (3.3.2; not into
a 2 nd Region—an effect particular to Vercingetorix).
A3.4.3 Germanic Raid. Germans Raid in the same way as Gallic
Warbands do (3.3.3), one or two Hidden Warbands per Region,
receiving Resources. In addition, such Warbands Raiding with Ario-
vistus in the Region may free Intimidate at the same time (A4.6.2).
That free Intimidate does not count as having executed a Special
Ability for the Sequence of Play (2.3.4) and can occur even with a
Limited Command (2.3.5).
A3.4.4 Germanic Battle. Germans in Ariovistus Battle in the same
way that Gauls do, either with or without an Ambush Special Ability
(A4.6.3). NOTE: Defenders therefore may Retreat from Germanic
Battle in the same way that they may from Gallic Battle.
LOSSES:
• Germanic Settlements (A1.4) absorb Losses and are removed as
if Germanic Allies (when both are present, the Germans choose
which will absorb the Loss).
• The Ariovistus piece in Battle causes the enemy to take double
Losses unless that enemy is Defending with Fort or Citadel.
NOTE: This Ariovistus effect does not apply against a Defender
with a Fort or Citadel, even if Ambushed. The effect essentially
is a shaded Germanic Horse Capability (card 59, 5.3) inherent
to the Ariovistus Leader.
• The Diviciacus piece in Battle may not absorb Losses until he is
the last possible piece to do so. A Loss removes Diviciacus only
on a roll of “1” (not 1-3). (Losses affect the Ariovistus piece the
same as other Falling Sky Leaders.)
A3.4.5 Germanic Losses, Harassment, and Agreement. Germans
suffering Losses in Battle (3.2.4, 3.3.4) may select pieces within the
same restrictions as other Factions. Germans may choose whether
or not to Harass (3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.3.2) and to agree to Supply Lines
or Retreat in Regions with German Control (3.2.1, 3.2.4, 3.3.4).
