A8.0 NON-PLAYERS
Use the Falling Sky Second Edition section 8 rules and charts—in-
cluded in this expansion—for all Non-players. For any Non-players
in the Ariovistus scenario and the first half of The Gallic War, use
the Ariovistus Non-player foldout. The Ariovistus Germanic Tribes
Non-player provides a full Non-player, including its own flowchart
and Event Instructions. Rules sections 8.1 to 8.4 apply fully to it,
along with amendments in A8.2-A8.4 below. Section A8.7 details its
conditions and priorities as displayed on its flowchart. Section A8.9
provides amended results for solitaire play of the Ariovistus scenario.
NOTE: The Ariovistus deck provides three reference cards that list
adjustments to Falling Sky’s Non-player Belgae, Aedui, and Roman
flowcharts when playing expansion scenarios. Keep them near the
Non-player charts.
For Ariovistus scenarios, the following Non-player combinations
are recommended:
• With three players, use either the Belgae or Aedui Non-player and
play the other three Factions.
• With two players, play Romans and Germans and use the Belgae
and Aedui Non-players.
• With one player, play Romans or Germans and use the remaining
three Non-players.
A8.2.1 Instructions. For Ariovistus scenarios, refer to the Ariovistus
Non-player Instructions foldout to implement Events marked with
Laurels or Carnyx for that Non-player.
A8.2.2 Dual Use. Non-player Germans use shaded Event text, if any.
A8.2.3, A8.3.1 Event Actions and Locations. Settlements receive
an equal priority as Citadels for placement or removal by Event.
For actions by Arverni, follow the Arverni Phase rules as applicable
(A6.2). NOTE: Per the second bullet of 8.2.3, Non player Germanic
Tribes in Ariovistus when instructed by Event to select one or more
Gallic Factions (Celtic Rites, Druids, Remi Influence) instead
decline the Event.
A8.4 Other Guidelines
Throughout section 8.4, treat references to “Arverni” as “Germans”,
“Gauls” as “Gauls or Germans”, and “Germans” as “Arverni”.
A8.5.1 Non-Player Belgic Battle or March? For both
the conditions (diamond) and priorities (box) for Non-
player Belgic Battle or March under Threat, ignore the
“non-German” stipulation: in Ariovistus scenarios, Non-
player Belgae consider German enemies also for Battle/March. Also,
count any Settlements on the map as “Allies” for these conditions
and priorities.
ENLIST: If Marching Germans, move them out of a Belgica or
Germania Region or Treveri, if able.
A8.5.6 Quarters. Non-player Belgae when moving in the Quarters
Phase to join the Leader with more Belgic Warbands first move to
Morini, Nervii, or Treveri (if able, instead of keeping the Leader
within one Region of the most Regions with Belgic Forces).
NOTE: Such Ariovistus adjustments to Non-player flowcharts are
summarized on reference playing cards, one each for Non-player
Belgae, Aedui, and Romans.
A8.6.2 Non-Player Aedui Battle? For both the conditions
(diamond) and priorities (box) for Non-player Aedui
Battle in Ariovistus scenarios, count any Settlements on
the map as “Allies”. Also, do not Battle where the Divi-
ciacus Leader could take any Loss in a counterattack.
A8.6.5 Non-Player Aedui March? After carrying out the specified
March priorities, March the Diviciacus Leader to join the largest
group of Aedui Warbands possible (if on the map and not already
with the largest group).
A8.6.6 Non-Player Aedui Agreements. For the unshaded Ariovistus
Event Admagetobriga, Non-player Belgae agree to use of their
Warbands only where the executing Faction has pieces (that will also
be in the Battle). For Frumentum, Transfer half of the Aedui’s total
Resources to Non-player Romans only (none to player Romans).
A8.7 Non-Player Germanic Actions
This subsection governs actions by the Germanic Tribes
Faction when a Non-player in Ariovistus scenarios, as
shown on the Ariovistus “Non-Player Germans” flow-
chart sheet.
A8.7.1 Battle or March under Threat? Non-player Germans, when
Eligible, check for threats or Battle opportunities and, if any, either
Battle against or March away from those threats. If the Germans
have Ariovistus or a group of at least six Germanic Warbands in
any Region where any enemy has an Ally, a Citadel, a Legion, or
separately at least four pieces, the Germans may Battle, as follows.
The Germans will Battle (maybe with Ambush or Intimidate, see
below) only in Regions where they will inflict more Losses on the
enemy than they will suffer, and no Loss on Ariovistus, presuming
all Defender Loss rolls result in Defender removals (the best possible
case for the Germanic Attack), and taking into account any Special
Ability such as Ambush:
First, check whether Ariovistus meets the initial Battle-or-March
condition above (he is with an enemy that has at least four pieces, an
Ally, Citadel, or a Legion). If he does but nevertheless will not Battle
(because he could not guarantee enough enemy Losses per A3.2.4
& A3.3.4, would suffer a Loss himself, or is outnumbered—see be-
low), the Germans do not Battle at all, but instead March per below.
Next, check whether the first Battle Region will result in Ambush
and, if not, whether Intimidate will precede Battle. (See the relevant
sections below.)
Now the Germans Battle the enemies triggering the Battle condition
above. Within that, first Ariovistus fights against such an enemy that
has fewer mobile pieces (Leader, Legions, Auxilia, Warbands) than
the Germans do (if it is possible within the Loss requirements above).
Finally, the Germans Battle other enemies where they can (where
the Germans are able to inflict more Losses than they will suffer).
(Set order or targets among equal candidates randomly, 8.3.4). They
select applicable Battle Regions until they run out of candidate
Regions or of Resources.
IF NONE OR IF ENEMY AT VICTORY: If the condition above
caused the possibility of Battle, but no Battle occurred—or if the
condition did not apply but an enemy Faction currently has a victory
margin of 0 or better (7.3) and Ariovistus has at least 12 Germanic
Warbands in his Region—the Germans instead March as follows:
March all mobile Germanic Forces out of each Region that either
meets the “Battle or March under Threat” condition above or has the
Germanic Leader. Keep Marching groups from each origin together.
March first with the Germanic Leader (and the Germanic Warbands
with him) then with other groups.
The above Marching groups move into at least one destination
Region and up to the number of destinations equal to the number
of origin Regions. They do not enter any of the above Regions that
other Germans are departing. Within those restrictions, if the Romans
are at victory (have a margin of 1 or better, 7.3), the Germans first
March to Regions that have the most Dispersed Tribes that they can
reach. Within that objective (if it applies), if either Aedui or Belgae
(or both) are at victory, the Germans first March to Regions with
most Allied Tribes of those Gallic Factions at victory. Within any
of those objectives that apply, they first choose destination Regions
that have no Germanic Control so as to add the most Germanic
Control possible (if any).
IF NONE: If no Battle or March occurred (including because the
Germans have 0 Resources, or because Frost blocked March per
2.3.8), proceed to A8.7.2 below to consider whether the Germans
will Pass or play the Event.
AMBUSH: If the Germans are Battling per above and can Ambush
in any of those Battles, they do so—but only where the enemy’s
Retreat out of that Region could lower the number of pieces it would
remove, or Battle could allow a Counterattack to inflict at least one
Loss on the Germans. NOTE: A defending Legion or Leader would
meet the 2nd requirement, because it could survive multiple die roll
Losses to then inflict one Loss in Counterattack.
If they Ambushed in the 1st Battle per above, they also do so in each
other Battle possible.
If no such Ambush is possible, the Germans instead Intimidate
before Battle per below.
INTIMIDATE: Before resolving Battle (if not Ambushing) or after
Raiding or Marching, the Germans, wherever they can (per A4.6.2),
Intimidate to remove enemy pieces that would not be guaranteed to
be removed in an immediately subsequent Battle. They first Intimi-
date to remove player (not Non-player or Arverni) Allies, choosing
within that Romans, then Aedui, then Belgae. Then next Intimidate
to remove player Roman Auxilia, then player Aedui Warbands,
then player Belgic Warbands. Then they remove Non-player Ro-
man then Aedui Allies (not Non-player Belgae or Arverni). Finally,
they remove other Non-player Roman or Aedui pieces (Auxilia or
Warbands) only.
Lastly, the Germans place Intimidated markers in Ariovistus’s Re-
gion if the Germans Raided there, as part of their free Intimidate
(A3.4.3). Then, if they removed any pieces above, they place Intimi-
dated markers wherever they can (per A4.6.2). NOTE: Outside of
Raid with free Intimidate, Non-player Germans will not Intimidate
merely to place markers without removing pieces.
If the Germans did not Intimidate or only free Intimidated with in
Ariovistus’s Raid Region, the Germans instead add no Special Abil-
ity (Command only, 2.3.4) to a Raid or Battle Command or instead
Settle after Marching (see below).
SETTLE: If the Germans are Rallying, or are Marching and did
not Intimidate, they also Settle to place all Settlements that they
can, as follows. If Rallying, they Settle first if they can place any
Settlement(s), otherwise after Rallying, if they are able. If Marching,
they Settle all Settlements possible after resolving the March. If the
Germans are unable to place any Settlements in the above cases, they
instead add no Special Ability (executing the Command only, 2.3.4).
A8.7.2 Pass or Event? If the initial Battle-or-March condition
above is not met—or if no such Battle or March was possible—the
Germans might Pass in order to be 1st Eligible on the next card, or
might play the Event.
Check the Faction order (2.3.3) on the currently played and next
showing cards. If the Germanic Tribes symbol is first of the four
symbols on the next upcoming card but not on the currently played
card (regardless of Faction Eligibility cylinders), roll a die to see if
the Germans Pass (2.3.3): on a roll of 1-4, they Pass. NOTE: Thus,
they do not Pass if 1st on both cards or if WINTER is showing.
If the Germans do not Pass, check whether they have the
option to execute the Event (because they are 1st Eligible,
or because the 1st Eligible Faction used a Special Abil-
ity, 2.3.4). If not, proceed to A8.7.3 below to consider
whether the Germans will Raid. If so, check whether the
Event would be Ineffective, would add a Capability dur-
ing the game’s final year, or is listed as “No Germans”
(8.1.1; the Germans or Arverni symbol on the card would
have gray crossed swords, 8.2.1)—if any apply, proceed
to A8.7.3 Raid.
NOTE: If the Germans or Arverni symbol on
the Event card has gray laurels, or the Arver-
ni symbol has gray carnyx (A8.2.1), see the
Non-player Germans section of the Ariovistus
Event Instructions foldout.
If none of the above applies to the Event, the Germans execute it
per 8.2. NOTE: Any Non-player Germans Event Instructions (8.2.1)
may render the Event Ineffective or “No Germans”; if so, proceed
to A8.7.3.
A8.7.3 Raid? If no Battle or March under threat, Pass, or Event
conditions were met, the Germans will either Raid to replenish Re-
sources, Rally, or March to spread their Control or mass their forces.
Check the Germans’ Resources—if fewer than four Resources,
roll a die and on a roll of 1-4, they attempt to Raid. If Raiding per
below would gain the Germans at least two Resources total, they
Raid wherever they can, in the following order: from Romans or
Aedui where able, then from Belgae, then (in other Regions) from
no Faction (3.3.3).
INTIMIDATE: After Raiding, the Germans free Intimidate in Ario-
vistus’s Region if they can, then Intimidate further per A8.7.1 above.
IF NONE: If the Germans are to Raid bA8.7.4 Rally? If the Germans have neither Battled, Marched, Passed,
executed the Event, nor Raided, they Rally and Settle if doing either
would place a Germanic Ally, a Settlement, or at least four Germanic
Warbands total, or if it would add to Germanic Control. Before Ral-
lying, they Settle to place any Settlements that they can (A8.7.1).
Then, they Rally to place all Germanic Allies possible. Finally, they
place all Germanic Warbands possible, starting with any Settlement
Regions and/or Germania (thereby reducing Resource costs when
their Resources are few).
SETTLE: After Rallying, the Germans Settle per A8.7.1 above, if
they have not already done so before Rallying.
IF NONE: If the Germans cannot so Rally, they instead Raid per
A8.7.3 above.
A8.7.5 March to Expand or Mass? If the Germans did not execute
any Command or play the Event per the above, they March into up
to three Regions to claim Control and/or to reposition their Leader
and Warbands. For any March below, the Germans move in with
their Leader and the most Warbands able, but leave one Germanic
Warband behind per origin Region and enough not to remove any
German Control. Also, they keep Marching groups of Warbands
together (to the same destination).
First, March Warbands to add German Control to up to two Re-
gions—Regions that are in or adjacent to Germania, if possible.
Then, March into one additional Region as needed to move the
largest group of Germanic Warbands on the map that is not with the
Germanic Leader toward the Leader, or the Leader (and Warbands
with him, per above) if he is in and adjacent only to German Control
Regions toward a Region without German Control. (Among these
latter actions, choose randomly, 8.3.4.)
INTIMIDATE OR SETTLE: After Marching, the Germans Intimi-
date or Settle per A8.7.1 above.
IF NONE: If the Germans cannot so March (for example, during
Frost, 2.3.8), they instead Rally per A8.7.4 or, if that is not possible,
Raid per A8.7.3.
A8.7.6 Quarters. During Quarters Phase (6.3.2), Non-player Ger-
mans first leave any (Drought) Devastated Region where they
have no Ally or Settlement for random adjacent Regions that they
Control (if they can). They then (or thereby) move their Leader and/
or one group of Warbands, so as to join the Leader with the largest
group of Germanic Warbands able and, within that, to get or keep
the Leader within one Region of the most Regions with Germanic
Forces able. They leave behind at least one Warband and at least the
number Warbands needed to retain any German Control.
A8.8.1 Non-Player Roman Battle or March? For both
the conditions (diamond) and priorities (box) for Non-
player Roman Battle or March under Threat in Ariovistus
scenarios, count any Settlements on the map as “Allies”.
Also, Battle against the Aedui Diviciacus Leader only if the Aedui
are currently at a victory score of 0 or better (7.3).
For Non-player Roman March, upon a die roll of 1-2 (March box
bullet , sub-bullet ), count Arverni Allies plus Citadels instead
of Germanic Allies; March to Arverni Allies and Citadels rather
than to Germanic Allies.
SCOUT: In Ariovistus scenarios, ignore the “if Frost” priority on
Scouting Germanic Warbands.
A8.8.8 Admagetorbriga. For the, unshaded Ariovistus Event
Admagetobriga, Non-player Romans do not agree to any use of
their Auxilia.
A8.9 1-Player Victory
NON-PLAYER VICTORY:
• If Germans—Germania Appendage. The Suebi overcome Gallic
resistance and Caesar’s interference to lead a wave Germanic
migration that pushes the Celts back from the Rhenus and
postpones Rome’s conquest of Gaul.
PLAYER VICTORY:
• 3 or More, Player as German—Gallia Germanica! Ariovistus’s
bid for Suebi ascendance wins the Germanic tribes enduring power
in Gaul as the Belgae and Aedui reel from dual invasions and the
Romans reconsider their interest in Transalpina.ut cannot gain enough Re-
sources per above, they Pass.
